CHAPTER 1

THE VIEW FROM EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY

There can be no doubt that a tribe including many members who, from possessing in a high degree the spirit of patriotism, fidelity, obedience, courage, and sympathy, were always ready to aid one another, and to sacrifice themselves for the common good would be victorious over most other tribes; and this would be natural selection.

—Darwin 1871, 166

Religion is often used to explain purpose and order at all levels, from celestial bodies, to human society, to the actions of individual people and other creatures. Darwin showed how the properties inherent in words such as “purpose,” “order,” “adaptation,” and “organism” can arise by the process of natural selection. However, the evolutionary concept of purpose and order is highly restrictive and may well apply to individuals but not to groups. The image of society as a single organism writ large, which has so often been taken for granted by religious and other nonevolutionary thinkers, must be questioned very seriously in the light of evolution.

To evaluate religious groups as organisms, we must begin with the more general question of whether any kind of group qualifies as an organism. This chapter will lay the groundwork by reviewing the history of thinking on groups in evolutionary biology, from Darwin to the present, with special reference to human evolution (see Sober and Wilson 1998 for a book-length account). It is a tumultuous and fascinating history. Although Darwin was characteristically clear-sighted, many of his successors uncritically assumed that adaptive societies can evolve as easily as adaptive individuals. The term “for the good of the group” was used as freely as “for the good of the individual.” Then, starting in the 1960s, adaptation at the level of groups was rejected so strongly that the ensuing period could be called the age of individualism in evolutionary biology. Fortunately, science is not destined to be a frictionless pendulum that swings back and forth between extreme positions. A middle ground is becoming established in which groups are acknowledged to evolve into adaptive units, but only if special conditions are met. Ironically, in human groups it is often religion that provides the special conditions. Religion returns to center stage, not as a theological explanation of purpose and order, but as itself a product of evolution that enables groups to function as adaptive units—at least to a degree.

ADAPTATION AND FUNCTIONALIST THINKING

The basic concept of adaptation and the interpretation of groups as adaptive units existed far before Darwin’s theory of evolution. The *Oxford English Dictionary* defines adaptation as “the action or process of fitting or suiting one thing to another.” Human artifacts are often clearly adapted to perform a given function. A bow is designed to shoot an arrow. An arrow is designed to fly through the air and pierce its target. Likewise, the form and behavior of organisms are often clearly adapted to achieve certain goals. The coat of a polar bear is designed to keep it warm and to prevent it from being seen. The behavior of a polar bear stalking its prey is designed to get close enough to attack while avoiding detection.

Thinking about an object or an organism as if it has a purpose can be called functionalist thinking. Functionalist thinking can be highly effective when applied to things that actually have a purpose, but in other contexts it can be misleading. Wondering about the purpose of your neighbor’s behavior can help you discern his intentions, but wondering about the purpose of the moon leads only to a folk tale. The reverse is true for non-functionalist thinking. A boulder rolling down a hill has no purpose, but merely a path which must be predicted to get out of the way. It would be disastrous to think of a boulder as like an attacking predator or an attacking predator as like a boulder. Functionalist and nonfunctionalist ways of thought are so different from each other, and so useful in some contexts but misleading in others, that they may actually have evolved as separate cognitive skills (Hauser and Carey 1998; Tomasello 1999).

Functionalist thinking has been applied to social groups throughout history. Plato compared the various classes of society to the organs of a single organism. Religious thought is rife with organismic allusions—as in Paul’s description (1 Cor. 12) of the body of the church, united under the head of Christ. Similarly, the Anglican bishop Joseph Butler (\[1726\] 1950, 21) claimed that “it is as manifest that we were made for society and to promote the happiness of it, as that we were intended to take care of our own life and health and private good.” The founders of the social sciences talked unabashedly about societal organisms, complete with group minds (Wegner 1986). However, although the metaphor of society as organism appears plausible in some cases, it is misleading in others. A well-organized attacking army seems more like a single predator than a passing boulder, but the class of beggars has no organ-like function in society, although it may be explained by functionalist thinking at a lower level, such as individual greed resulting in an unequal division of resources. Thus, social groups are a nebulous and heterogeneous category with respect to the concept of adaptation.

THE FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEM OF SOCIAL LIFE

Darwin provided the first successful scientific theory of adaptations. Evolution explains adaptive design on the basis of three principles: phenotypic variation, heritability, and fitness consequences. A phenotypic trait is anything that can be observed or measured. Individuals in a population are seldom identical and usually vary in their phenotypic traits. Furthermore, offspring frequently resemble their parents, sometimes because of shared genes but also because of other factors such as cultural transmission. It is important to think of heritability as a correlation between parents and offspring, caused by any mechanism. This definition will enable us to go beyond genes in our analysis of human evolution. Finally, the fitness of individuals—their propensity to survive and reproduce in their environment—often depends on their phenotypic traits. Taken together, the three principles lead to a seemingly inevitable outcome—a tendency for fitness-enhancing phenotypic traits to increase in frequency over multiple generations. Darwin’s theory is so simple that it can be explained in a single paragraph, but its implications are so profound that the study of life was transformed, enabling the great geneticist Theodosius Dobzhansky (1973) to say: “Nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution.”

The fact that adaptation is defined in terms of survival and reproduction places limits on the kinds of adaptation that can evolve. To appreciate the limitations, let’s first consider the evolution of an individual-level adaptation, such as cryptic coloration. Imagine a population of moths that vary in the degree to which they match their background. Every generation, the most conspicuous moths are detected and eaten by predators while the most cryptic moths survive and reproduce. If offspring resemble their parents, then the average moth will become more cryptic with every generation. Anyone who has beheld an insect that looks exactly like a leaf, right down to the veins and simulated herbivore damage, cannot fail to be impressed by the ability of natural selection to produce breathtaking adaptations at the individual level.

Now consider the same process for a group-level adaptation, such as members of a group warning each other about approaching predators. Imagine a flock of birds that vary in their tendency to scan the horizon for predators and to utter a call when one is spotted. The most vigilant individuals will not necessarily survive and reproduce better than the least vigilant. If scanning the horizon detracts from feeding, the most vigilant birds will gather less food than their more oblivious neighbors. If uttering a cry attracts the attention of the predator, then sentinels place themselves at risk by warning others. Birds that do not scan the horizon and that remain silent when they see a predator may well survive and reproduce better than their vigilant neighbors.

These two examples show that the evolutionary concept of adaptation does not always conform to the intuitive concept, especially at the group level. It is easy to imagine a bird flock as an adaptive unit and to use functionalist thinking to predict its properties. We would expect members of the flock to adopt the creed “all for one and one for all.” We might expect sentries to be posted at all times to detect predators at the earliest possible moment and to relay the information to feeding members of the flock. Unfortunately, individuals who display these prosocial behaviors do not necessarily survive and reproduce better than those who enjoy the benefits without sharing the costs. Since Darwin’s theory relies entirely on differences in survival and reproduction, it appears unable to explain groups as adaptive units. This can be called the fundamental problem of social life. Groups function best when their members provide benefits for each other, but it is difficult to convert this kind of social organization into the currency of biological fitness.

Now we can begin to see why the concept of religious groups as adaptive units does not emerge automatically from evolutionary theory. On the basis of what we have considered so far, the theory has difficulty explaining any kind of group as an adaptive unit, including those that might be found in our own species.

DARWIN’S SOLUTION TO THE FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEM

Darwin was aware of the fundamental problem of social life and proposed a solution. Suppose there is not just one flock of birds but many flocks. Furthermore, suppose that the flocks vary in their proportion of callers. Even if a caller does not have a fitness advantage within its own flock, groups of callers will be more successful than groups of noncallers. In the following famous passage from *The Descent of Man,* Darwin (1871, 166) used this reasoning to explain the evolution of human moral virtues that appear designed to promote group welfare:

It must not be forgotten that although a high standard of morality gives but a slight or no advantage to each individual man and his children over the other men of the same tribe, yet that an increase in the number of well-endowed men and advancement in the standard of morality will certainly give an immense advantage to one tribe over another. There can be no doubt that a tribe including many members who, from possessing in a high degree the spirit of patriotism, fidelity, obedience, courage, and sympathy, were always ready to aid one another, and to sacrifice themselves for the common good would be victorious over most other tribes; and this would be natural selection. At all times throughout the world tribes have supplanted other tribes; and as morality is one important element in their success, the standard of morality and the number of well-endowed men will thus everywhere tend to rise and increase.

Darwin was proposing that the three ingredients of natural selection—phenotypic variation, heritability, and fitness consequences—can exist at the level of groups. There can be a population of groups (many tribes of humans, many flocks of birds) that vary in their phenotypic properties (standard of morality, warning cries), with consequences for survival and reproduction (intertribal warfare, avoiding predators). If current groups resemble the previous groups from which they were derived, then groups can evolve into adaptive units in just the same way that individuals evolve into adaptive units.

Darwin’s solution to the fundamental problem of social life is elegant and perhaps even obvious in retrospect. After all, if adaptations evolve by differential survival and reproduction, it makes sense that group-level adaptations evolve by the differential survival and reproduction of groups. However, Darwin’s solution has two limitations that must always be kept in mind. First, just because groups can evolve into adaptive units doesn’t mean that they do. The days of axiomatically thinking of groups as adaptive units are gone forever. Special conditions are required that may or may not be satisfied in the real world. Opposing forces exist that may or may not be overcome. In the case of our birds, group selection favors vigilant callers but selection within groups favors birds that stuff their crops and think only of saving their own feathers when a predator appears on the horizon. If we wish to explain bird flocks as adaptive units, not only must we demonstrate a process of among-group selection, but we also must show that it operates more strongly than the opposing process of within-group selection. The term multilevel selection expresses the possibility that natural selection can operate at more than one level of the biological hierarchy.

Second, even when groups do evolve into adaptive units, often they are adapted to behave aggressively toward other groups. In Darwin’s scenario, the moral virtues are practiced among members of a tribe and are directed against other tribes. Group selection does not eliminate conflict but rather elevates it up the biological hierarchy, from among individuals within groups to among groups within a larger population. The most that group selection can do is produce groups that are like organisms in the harmony and coordination of their parts. We already know about the competitive and predatory interactions that take place among individual organisms in ecological communities, and the same can be expected of well-adapted groups. This might be a disappointment for those searching for a universal morality that transcends group boundaries, but it follows directly from the organismic concept of groups. I do not mean to imply that the search for a universal morality is hopeless, only that it does not follow automatically from group selection theory. Religions are well known for their in-group morality and out-group hostility, so we will return to this theme repeatedly in future chapters.

Looking forward, we can anticipate that evolutionary theory will turn the study of religion into quite a complex subject. It is possible to imagine religious groups as adaptive units, but this outcome is by no means obvious or inevitable. A major alternative hypothesis is that some features of religion are a product of within-group selection, benefiting some individuals at the expense of others within the same religious group. In addition, a host of nonfunctional explanations are possible, since there is more to evolution than natural selection (Gould and Lewontin 1979; Williams 1996). The likelihood of these possibilities depends on many factors, including the balance between levels of selection. To make matters even more complex, genetic and cultural evolution are both multilevel processes that interact with each other. This book is about evolution but it is not restricted to genetic evolution. At all times throughout the world (to paraphrase Darwin) religious systems have arisen in profusion, competing against each other and against nonreligious social organizations. Differences among religions are culturally based, but that does not prevent religious groups from succeeding or failing on the basis of their properties and for these properties to be transmitted with modification to descendant groups. At a different temporal scale, the human mind is a product of genetic evolution over thousands of generations during which people were subdivided into small groups of hunter-gatherers. Our genetically innate psychology might therefore reflect the influence of both within- and among-group selection, regardless of the kinds of groups in which we participate today (Barkow, Cosmides, and Tooby 1992; Boehm 1999). Evaluating these possibilities and relating them to the nature of modern religious groups will be a major undertaking requiring many scholar-decades of work.

EVOLUTIONARY THEORY’S WRONG TURN

I have portrayed group selection as a process that can occur but which also must contend against forces that pull in other directions. In the 1960s a consensus emerged that group selection is such a weak force that it can be ignored for most purposes (Williams 1966). The consensus held that even though it is theoretically possible for groups to evolve into adaptive units, it almost never happens in the real world. Konner (1999, 30–31) describes this period in the history of evolutionary biology:

Current intrusions of Darwin’s theory into our awareness stem from the mid-1960s, when the British geneticist W. D. Hamilton proposed a solution to the problem of altruism. For traditional social scientists who see societies as functioning organisms, the existence of altruism does not pose a problem. In this view, without altruism societies would not work; groups that lacked it would not survive.

But this is no comfort to strict Darwinians, who see natural selection as operating at the level of individuals, even to the extent of disrupting the cohesiveness of societies. In their view, natural selection should have long since erased altruism. Hamilton’s solution was that evolution selects for altruism if it is directed at relatives in proportion to their relatedness, for then the altruist’s kin are more likely to survive to pass on the contributing genes. . . . Reciprocal altruism, proposed by Robert Trivers in the early 1970s, was a you-scratch-my-back-and-later-I’ll scratch-yours model. Like kin selection, it required no real genetic generosity, only delayed self-interest. With these ideas, biologists seemed to have little further need for the metaphor of society as an organism.

Konner appreciates the diversity of perspectives across time and disciplines that I have also emphasized. Although many social scientists take the organismic concept of society for granted, evolutionary biologists in the 1960s rejected group selection so strongly that it became heretical to think of “society as an organism”—to use Konner’s words—for humans or any other species. Individuals are the organisms and society is merely a convenient word for what individuals do to each other in the course of maximizing their own fitness. The illusion of adaptation at the group level can be explained in terms of individuals increasing the fitness of their genes in the bodies of others, reciprocal exchange, or even more self-serving benefits such as downright deception and exploitation.

The rejection of group selection was hailed by evolutionary biologists as a major event. Alexander (1987, 3) even called it the greatest intellectual revolution of the twentieth century. It is true that the early group selection literature was an easy target for criticism. When a biologist explained a given behavior as for the good of the group or the species, it was usually a naive expression of group-level functionalism rather than a principled argument. However, the wholesale rejection of group selection was itself a wrong turn from which the field is only starting to recover. I have written extensively on this topic elsewhere, including my book-length account with Elliott Sober (Sober and Wilson 1998; Wilson 1998a, 1999a, 2000). Here I will provide a brief summary of evolutionary theory’s wrong turn and why it needs to be put behind us.[1]()

**How to see group selection**

To give the critics of group selection their due, it is perfectly possible for a behavior that seems altruistic to be individually selfish upon closer inspection.[2]() Returning to our bird example, suppose that uttering a call does not increase the risk of being attacked by an approaching predator. On the contrary, calling advertises to the predator that it has been spotted and that a less vigilant member of the group should be targeted. If these are the facts of the matter, then the evolution of calling behavior could be explained entirely by within-group selection. Calling individuals survive and reproduce better than noncalling individuals in the same group. The function of the adaptation is not to warn other members of the group but to communicate with the predator in a way that actually endangers other members of the group. We would be right to reject group selection in this case.

But now suppose that our original story is correct and calls are used to warn other members of the flock at the caller’s expense. Calling is selectively disadvantageous within groups and evolves only because groups of callers fare better than groups of noncallers. A subtle shift in perspective can make calling appear individually selfish, even though it evolves by group selection. To pick an extreme example, imagine a flock of birds with one caller and nine noncallers. Everyone has a low fitness in this flock because only one bird is looking out for predators; however, this bird has the lowest fitness of all. Let us say that the chance of surviving predators is 50 percent for the noncallers and 25 percent for the caller. A second flock of birds has nine callers and one noncaller. Everyone has a high fitness in this flock because so many members are looking out for predators; however, the shirking noncaller has the highest fitness of all. Let us say that the chance of surviving predators is 100 percent for the noncaller and 75 percent for the callers. When we compare the fitness of callers and noncallers within each group, we see that callers are the losers in both cases. However, the group with more callers fares better than the group with fewer callers. This is the classic group selection scenario that began with Darwin. Now for the subtle shift in perspective: Let’s calculate the average survival of callers and noncallers across the groups. One noncaller has a survival probability of 100 percent and nine have a survival probability of 50 percent for an average of 55 percent. One caller has a survival probability of 25 percent and nine have a survival probability of 75 percent for an average of 70 percent. The average caller is more fit than the average noncaller, so why not say that calling evolves by individual selection? Like a magician’s trick, the need to invoke group selection appears to vanish! Of course, the disappearance is just an illusion. The need for multiple groups and variation among groups is absolutely essential for the calling behavior to evolve.

It follows that a certain procedure is required to see group selection. First, we must identify the relevant groups, a point to which I will return below. Second, we must compare the fitnesses of individuals within groups. Third, we must compare the fitnesses of groups in the total population. Finally we must combine these effects to determine the net result of what evolves. Employing this procedure for our bird flock example, the groups are flocks, callers are less fit than noncallers within flocks, but flocks with more callers are more fit than flocks with fewer callers. When the variation among groups is as extreme as in my example (one caller in the first group and nine callers in the second group) group selection is by far the strongest evolutionary force and the calling behavior evolves despite its selective disadvantage within groups.[3]() However, all of this clarity is lost when we average the fitness of individuals across groups. In this case we correctly conclude that the calling behavior evolves, but we are unable to say whether it evolves on the strength of a fitness advantage within groups or between groups—the very distinction required to determine if calling evolves by group selection! If we define “individual selection” in terms of fitness averaged across groups rather than fitness within single groups, we have defined group selection out of existence, making “individual selection” a vacuous term for “whatever evolves.” Elliott Sober and I call the practice of first subsuming group selection into the definition of individual selection, and then using this expanded definition to argue against group selection, “the averaging fallacy.”[4]()

It turns out that the rejection of group selection in the 1960s was based largely on the averaging fallacy. The verdict seemed to be that within-group selection is invariably stronger than between-group selection, but the theories that replaced group selection also assumed the existence of groups. How could they fail to, since social interactions almost invariably take place in groups that are small compared to the total population? To proceed further, we need to confront the crucial question of how groups are defined in evolutionary models of social behavior.

**How to define groups**

The procedure for seeing group selection requires an unambiguous definition of groups. At first this might seem like a hopeless enterprise. The early biologists who thought uncritically about “the good of the group” saw adaptive groupings everywhere: from bird flocks, ant colonies, and fish schools at one end of the spectrum to whole species and ecosystems at the other end. The groups considered by modern multilevel selectionists are only slightly less diverse. Nevertheless, this diversity only exists when we consider a diversity of phenotypic traits. When we consider the evolution of a single trait, there is much less ambiguity about what constitutes a group.

Let’s begin with our trusty bird example before deriving the general rule. Why did bird flocks seem like such appropriate groups for the evolution of warning calls? Because it was assumed as part of the example that all members of a flock are at risk from the approaching predator and hear the cry of any member of the flock. Uttering a cry alters fitness within the flock and has no effect on other flocks. If it turned out that the predator targets several flocks at once and that a warning cry is heard by all the flocks, we would need to change our definition of groups. Similarly, if it turned out that a cry is only heard by one’s nearest neighbor rather than the whole flock, we might need to change our definition of groups yet again. The reason that the definition of groups is so closely tied to the details of the trait is because we are trying to predict the evolution of the trait. When the trait is a nonsocial behavior that alters the fitness of the individual alone, we needn’t concern ourselves with groups. But when the trait is a social behavior, the fitness of an individual is determined by its own trait and the traits of the individuals with whom it interacts. These individuals constitute the group, which must be identified accurately to calculate the fitnesses that determine the outcome of evolution.[5]()

It follows that groups must be defined separately for each and every trait. Suppose that we decide to study resource conservation in our birds. Birds that eat moderately have fewer offspring than birds in the same group that stuff their crops, but groups of moderate birds persist while groups of gluttonous birds overexploit their resources and go extinct (as proposed by Wynne-Edwards 1962). This is the same problem of altruism and selfishness that we encountered for warning cries, but here we need to find the appropriate groups for resource conservation. Bird flocks may be appropriate if they live on exclusive territories but not if many flocks share the same resources. If the birds live on an archipelago of islands, then perhaps a single island is the appropriate group for this particular trait. However, group selection might be less effective at the scale of islands than at the scale of bird flocks. If so, then the birds might behave altruistically with respect to warning cries but not with respect to feeding.

I coined the term “trait-group” to emphasize the intimate relationship between traits and groups in multilevel selection theory (Wilson 1975). However, this term merely recognizes something that has always been implicit in the definition of groups, inside and outside of biology. My bowling group is the people with whom I bowl, my study group is the people with whom I study, my platoon is the group of people with whom I fight, my nation is the group of people who share the same set of laws, my church is the group of people with whom I worship. All of these groups are defined in terms of the individuals who interact with respect to a given activity. There is an infinite variety of groups, but only when we consider an infinite variety of activities. For any particular activity, there is a single appropriate grouping. We all use the concept of trait-groups in our everyday lives without thinking about it.

Returning to biology, all theories of social behavior must identify the appropriate grouping to explain the evolution of a given behavior. Let’s say that the behavior involves fighting over a resource. We imagine one type of individual who shares amicably and another type who fights to take it all. If the individuals always meet in pairs, then pairs are the appropriate groups. If the individuals meet in triads or in free-for-alls of one hundred, then those are the appropriate groups. The groups are decided by the biology of the organism, not the whim of the biologist. Evolutionary game theory, one of the theoretical frameworks that was developed as an alternative to group selection, is very careful in this regard (Maynard Smith 1982; Dugatkin 1998; Skyrms 1996). Its formal name is N-person evolutionary game theory, where N is the number of individuals who socially interact, thereby influencing each other’s fitness. A game theory model of fighting, alarm calls, or resource conservation must identify the same groupings as a group selection model of fighting, alarm calls, or resource conservation. The same is true for all other theories of social behavior that were developed as alternatives to group selection, such as inclusive fitness theory (Hamilton 1964, 1975) and selfish gene theory (Williams 1966; Dawkins 1976).

The nonarbitrary definition of groups and the need for all theories to converge upon the same definition for any particular trait allows the averaging fallacy to be revealed to its fullest extent. Take any evolutionary theory of social behavior, including those that were developed as alternatives to group selection, and find the groups that are identified within their own frameworks. Employ the procedure outlined above for seeing group selection, and you will find it. Most of the behaviors that have been rendered as only “apparently” altruistic but “really” selfish during the age of individualism are selectively disadvantageous within groups and evolve only by increasing the fitness of groups, relative to other groups, exactly as Darwin proposed.[6]()

It should be clear by now that the revival of multilevel selection theory involves more than acknowledging one or two examples of group selection. Once the averaging fallacy is avoided, group selection is required to explain many traits whose evolution is already well documented and accepted. However, remember that my own account of group selection was cautious. Just because it happens doesn’t mean that it happens all the time or invariably prevails against within-group selection. There are plenty of cases in which group selection remains a meager evolutionary force, even after we see it clearly. The importance of group selection in human genetic and cultural evolution remains to be determined. Above all, we do not want to return to the days when groups were axiomatically assumed to function as adaptive units. The point is to achieve a middle ground in which the importance of the various levels of natural selection are examined on a case-by-case basis, using a procedure that allows group selection to be seen where it exists.[7]() The belief that group selection can be categorically rejected belongs on the rubbish heap of history, alongside the earlier belief that groups always function as adaptive units.

MAJOR TRANSITIONS OF LIFE

The trait-group concept conflicts with the image of an organism as a unit that is adaptive with respect to many traits. After all, an individual organism like a bird eats as a unit, flies as a unit, fights as a unit, and so on. Some animal groups such as social insect colonies are integrated with respect to many traits. Similarly, some human groups organize the lives of their members from cradle to grave. In many other cases, however, groups are adaptive only with respect to one or a few traits. When I use the term “organismic” in connection with groups, it will be synonymous with “adaptive at the group level” and will refer to particular traits and the appropriate groupings for those traits, while remaining agnostic about other traits and groupings.[8]() The fact that people often participate in many groupings whose adaptedness must be evaluated on a case-by-case basis will become clear in subsequent chapters.

When group selection was rejected in the 1960s it was believed that evolution takes place entirely by mutational change. Since then, it has become increasingly certain that evolution also takes place along a different pathway: by social groups becoming so functionally integrated that they become higher-level organisms in their own right. One of the first to propose this radical new theory was Lynn Margulis (1970), who claimed that eukaryotic cells—the nucleated cells of all organisms other than bacteria—are actually symbiotic communities of bacteria whose members led a more autonomous existence in the distant past. Now it appears likely that similar transitions, from groups *of* organisms to groups *as* organisms, have occurred throughout the history of life, right down to the origin of life itself as social groups of cooperating molecular reactions (Maynard Smith and Szathmary 1995; Michod 1999a).

These discoveries are deliciously ironic. Thinking of social groups as like organisms has been out of fashion for thirty-five years, and now it turns out that organisms are themselves social groups! Moreover, each transition requires group-level selection, exactly as Darwin proposed. For example, a bacterial cell can be regarded as a social group of genes that coordinate their activities for their collective benefit. However, this group can be exploited by genes that use the resources of the cell to replicate themselves rather than by making products that contribute to the common good. Such “selfish genes” would fare better than “solid citizen genes” within the same cell, but cells with “selfish genes” would fare more poorly than cells with “solid citizen genes.” As an aside, my use of the term “selfish gene” in the previous sentence is not the same as its meaning in selfish gene theory (Dawkins 1976). In my case, I refer to genes that gain at the expense of other genes in the same cell; in contrast, selfish gene theory would classify either gene as selfish depending on which evolves, replacing the other gene in the total population (the averaging fallacy).[9]() In any case, the problem of “solid citizen” vs. “selfish” genes within cells is identical to the problem of calling vs. noncalling birds within flocks and moral vs. immoral people within tribes that led Darwin to propose his theory of group selection.

Viewing single organisms as highly integrated social groups has vastly expanded the scope and importance of multilevel selection theory. As Robert Trivers once remarked in a lecture, those interested in the evolution of social behavior have always appreciated the need to understand genetics, but who would have guessed thirty years ago that geneticists would need to understand the evolution of social behavior? There is also a return benefit, for understanding the mechanisms that allow organisms to become so integrated can help to identify similar mechanisms in social groups that might previously have been overlooked. In particular, sociobiologists have been fascinated, even mesmerized, by the problem of explaining altruistic traits that benefit the group at great cost to the individual. As we have seen, group selection can produce altruistic traits, but it must be exceptionally strong to oppose the strong selective disadvantage of altruism within groups. In contrast, the mechanisms that allow organisms to function as adaptive units do not appear very altruistic. Returning to the “selfish gene” that replicates rather than contributing to the common good of the cell, this problem can be solved by linking all the genes together into a chromosome that replicates as a unit. By eliminating the possibility of differential replication within the cell, chromosomes concentrate the process of natural selection at the among-cell level, neatly solving the fundamental problem of social life. But the genes responsible for the evolution of the chromosome do not appear self-sacrificial. Instead, they appear to benefit the group, of which they are a part, at no special cost to themselves.

Social control, rather than highly self-sacrificial altruism, appears to solve the fundamental problem of social life at the individual level. An entire lexicon of words describing social control in human life has been borrowed to describe genetic and developmental interactions; “sheriff” genes, “parliaments” of genes, “rules of fairness,” and so on. The laws of genetics and development, which originally referred merely to general patterns, have acquired an eerie resemblance to the other meaning of the word law—a social contract enforced by punishment.[10]()

What works for individuals can also work for social groups. In their drive to explain highly self-sacrificial altruism, sociobiologists have tended to ignore an even more important question: Does benefiting the group require overt altruism on the part of individuals? If not, then group selection can favor mechanisms that organize groups into adaptive units without strong selection against these mechanisms within groups.

I use the word “overt” because a close look at social control mechanisms shows that they differ from altruism only in degree and not in kind. Returning to our bird example, suppose we discover that warning calls are indeed risky and help others at the expense of the caller. If they were performed voluntarily they would qualify as altruistic, with all the self-sacrifice implied by the word. Then we discover that they are not performed voluntarily because birds that fail to call are severely punished by other birds. Calling no longer qualifies as altruistic, but we still must explain the evolution of the punishing behavior that makes calling selfish. Punishers cause birds to issue warning calls that help everyone in the group, including free-riders who do not share the cost of enforcement. We have not solved the problem of altruism but merely moved it from the calling behavior to the punishment behavior. Economists call this a second-order public goods problem: causing another to perform a public good is itself a public good (Heckathorn 1990, 1993). There is, however, an important difference between the two kinds of altruism. The individual cost of enforcement can be much lower than the individual cost of issuing a warning cry. Social control can be regarded as a form of low-cost altruism that evolves to promote behaviors that would qualify as high-cost altruism if they were performed voluntarily. Elliott Sober and I call this “the amplification of altruism” (Sober and Wilson 1998, chap. 4). In general, social control mechanisms do not alter the basic conclusion that group-level adaptations require a corresponding process of group selection. Instead, they partially relax the trade-off between group benefit and individual self-sacrifice, allowing among-group selection to act without strong counteracting within-group selection.

The concept of organisms as social groups has transformed our understanding of multilevel selection in several ways. First, never again can it be said that higher-level selection is always weak compared to lower-level selection. Single organisms such as you and I are shining contradictions of that statement. Second, higher-level selection has always appeared unlikely because it has been linked with self-sacrificial altruism. Social control mechanisms cut this Gordian knot by partially relaxing the trade-off between group benefit and individual cost. Social control mechanisms are obviously relevant to religious groups, which are based on much more than voluntary altruism. Third, it is inconceivable that higher-level selection stops at the level currently known as individual organisms. Selection at the level of social groups is likely to be an important, if not a dominating, evolutionary force in thousands of species. In some cases such as the social insects, the groups are so thoroughly integrated that they deserve to be called organisms in their own right, as Wheeler (1928) suggested long ago and as modern social insect biologists such as Seeley (1995) increasingly acknowledge.

Against this background, the organismic concept of human groups receives new life. Thirty years ago, evolutionary biologists would have dismissed the Hutterites’ comparison of their communities to bodies and beehives as the worst kind of naive group selectionism. Now it is a vivid dot on the scientific radar screen.

HUMAN GROUPS AS ADAPTIVE UNITS

So far I have discussed basic evolutionary principles that apply to all organisms. Now it is time to focus on our own species. We evolved in small groups that are roughly approximated by modern hunter-gatherer societies, which, though fast disappearing, still dot the surface of the globe. As Konner states in the passage quoted above, evolutionary biologists have tended to regard ancestral human groups as mere collections of self-interested individuals, exhibiting nepotism and niceness toward those who can return the favor but by no means qualifying as societal organisms.[11]() Multilevel selection theory makes it appear more likely that ancestral human groups were potent units of selection (Boehm 1999; Sober and Wilson 1998).

First, some empirical facts. Anthropologists don’t agree on much, but they appear to agree that modern hunter-gatherer societies around the world are remarkably egalitarian. The most impressive fact is that meat is usually scrupulously shared. The successful hunter and his immediate family get no more than the rest of the band. The most careful studies have weighed the meat on portable scales as it is divided into portions (Kaplan and Hill 1985a, b; Kaplan, Hill, and Hurtado 1984). Even when averaged over a period of weeks, there was no bias in favor of the actual procurers of the meat. Gathered items are shared less fully, but only in comparison to meat; the same study that reported 100 percent sharing of meat reported approximately 50 percent sharing of gathered items. If a number of people are gathering, it may make little sense to put the harvest together just to divide it again, so the sharing of gathered items must be evaluated differently than the sharing of meat.

Hunter-gatherer egalitarianism extends beyond food to social relationships. The request “take me to your leader” would be met with incomprehension, or perhaps ridicule, by a hunter-gatherer. There are no leaders other than those who have earned the respect of their peers by being models of good conduct, and who can only advise and not dictate. When the British anthropologist E. E. Evans-Pritchard attempted to identify leaders among the Nuer (a pastoralist rather than a hunter-gatherer society but similar with respect to egalitarianism), all he could find was someone called the leopard-skin chief who turned out to be a specialist in conflict resolution, about whom more will be said in [chapters 2]() and [6]().

Hunter-gatherers are egalitarian, not because they lack selfish impulses but because selfish impulses are effectively controlled by other members of the group. This form of guarded egalitarianism has been called “reverse dominance” by anthropologist Chris Boehm (1993, 1999; see also Knauft 1991). In many animal groups, the strongest individuals are usually able to dominate their rivals, taking a disproportionate share of the resources. This is within-group selection pure and simple. In human hunter-gatherer groups, an individual who attempts to dominate others is likely to encounter the combined resistance of the rest of the group. In most cases even the strongest individual is no match for the collective, so self-serving acts are effectively curtailed. Boehm’s survey of hunter-gatherer societies includes many examples of reverse domination, ranging in intensity from gossip, to ridicule, to ostracism, to assassination.

Earlier theories of hunter-gatherer egalitarianism focused on ecological conditions such as dispersed and unpredictable resources. In contrast, Boehm explains egalitarianism in terms of social norms, a shared understanding of do’s and don’ts that are enforced by rewards and punishments. A hunter-gatherer society is above all a moral community with a strong sense of right and wrong that organizes the practices of the group. The specific practices regarded as right and wrong might vary across groups, but in general “right” coincides with group welfare and “wrong” coincides with self-serving acts at the expense of other members of the group.

The concept of human groups as moral communities shows how much has been missed by kin selection theory, which predicts that prosocial behaviors should be directed primarily toward genetic relatives.[12]() Kin selection models assume that behavioral similarity is proportional to genetic similarity; for example, the only way to get a behaviorally uniform group is for it to be genetically uniform. In moral communities, social norms can create a degree of behavioral uniformity within groups and differences among groups that could never be predicted from their genetic structure and which is highly favorable for among-group selection.

The concept of human groups as moral communities also shows how much has been missed by the concept of reciprocal altruism, which predicts that prosocial behavior should be directed primarily toward those who will return the favor. Consider a group whose members believe that it is right to help others in proportion to need rather than the likelihood of return gains. Individuals who abide by the norm are rewarded, those who violate the norm are punished, and the group (let us say) prospers compared to groups whose members restrict helping to those who will return the favor. This is a plausible model, and there is no reason to think of the rewards and punishments supporting the norm of giving according to need as themselves a form of reciprocity. If I shun narrow reciprocators and favor those who give according to need, I am a second-order public good provider, not someone who is maximizing my own return benefits within my group.

On the other hand, the concept of human groups as moral communities fits nicely with the emerging paradigm of major transitions, in which groups become unified by a regulatory apparatus that promotes the welfare of the group as a whole without necessarily requiring extreme self-sacrifice of its members. An example will show how a real hunter-gatherer society accomplishes this, using mechanisms that border upon religion.

The Chewong are a tribe that inhabits the rain forest of the Malay peninsula (Howell 1984).[13]() They combine hunting and gathering with shifting agriculture, and they display the same kind of egalitarianism as pure hunter-gatherer societies. The distribution of food and other scarce items is governed by a system of superstitions known as *punen,* which roughly means “a calamity or misfortune, owing to not having satisfied an urgent desire”:

In the Chewong world, desires are most likely to occur in connection with food. If someone is not immediately invited to partake of a meal which he observes, or if someone is not given her share of any foodstuff seen to be brought back from the jungle, that person is placed in a state of punen because it is assumed one would always wish to be given a share and hence \[that not being given a share would lead one to\] experience an unfulfilled desire. . . . To “eat alone” is the ultimate bad behaviour in Chewong eyes, and there are several myths that testify to this. The sanction on sharing out food originates in the myth about Yinlugen Bud, who was the chief instrument in bringing the Chewong out of their presocial state by telling them that to eat alone was not proper human behaviour. (Howell 1984, 184)

This passage suggests that the superstitions, myths, and gods of Chewong culture are intimately related to a matter of supreme practical importance—food sharing. In addition, the punen system goes beyond beliefs to include social practices that virtually assure an equal distribution of food:

The Chewong take all possible precautions against provoking punen. All food caught in the forest is brought back and publicly revealed immediately. It is then shared out equally among all the households. The women cook it and then share the food in equal proportions among all the members of their own household. As soon as a carcass is brought back, and before it has been divided up, someone of the hunter’s family touches it with his finger and makes a round touching everyone present in the settlement, each time saying “punen.” . . . This is another way of announcing to everyone present that the food will soon be theirs, and to refrain from desiring it yet awhile. If guests arrive while the hosts are in the middle of a meal, they are immediately asked to partake. If they refuse, saying that they have just eaten, they are touched with a finger dipped in the food, while the person touching says “punen.” (185)

Although food is virtually always in short supply, other non-foodstuffs can be scarce or common depending upon the time of year or other circumstances. The punen system is sufficiently flexible to include items only when they are scarce:

Thus bamboo for baking the tapioca bread must be shared equally among all households if the gatherer had to go very far to obtain it. If the bamboo grows close to the settlement, one may collect enough for oneself only. The difference is expressed as bamboo far away (lao tyotn) or bamboo nearby (lao duah). If the nearby river dries out and water has to be carried some distance, it again has to be shared, but daily water collection from the usual source need not be shared. . . . Even if one does not want something that has been brought back, one has to be made publicly and specifically aware of the existence of the thing, by touch if not by receipt of an actual share. (185–86)

It might seem that the injunction to honor other people’s desires would lead to inappropriate sharing and the opportunity to freeload. However, this is not the case:

Once a desire has been voiced, the person who can satisfy it must immediately do so. If he refrains, the person refused will suffer the consequences of punen. But unvoiced desires are just as liable to provoke the same repercussions. In fact people hardly ever make overt requests for anything, and the fear of punen may easily have prevented people from requesting gifts from me. I can recall only one instance when I was solicited to give. An old woman, Mag, asked me to give her a whetstone, which I duly did. The rest of the Chewong, when they heard what Mag had done, commented unfavourably on her behaviour. Of course, if I had refused, it would have been because of my failing to satisfy her desire that Mag would have been bitten by a tiger, snake, or whatever. To desire for oneself can be seen to be bad on two counts. First, it is an overt emotion. Secondly, it emphasizes the individual at the expense of the social. (185)

The calamity that awaits someone who has been placed in a state of punen takes the form of an attack by a tiger, a snake, or a poisonous millipede. Moreover, these animals have spirit forms that can inflict other misfortunes such as disease or physical injury. Thus, virtually any misfortune can be used as “evidence” of a previous transgression. Immunity from disproof might seem like a weakness from a narrow scientific perspective, but it can be a strength for a social system designed to regulate human behavior.

This example gives a preview of some of the major themes that will occupy us in future chapters. The Chewong engage in many activities that would qualify as altruistic if performed voluntarily and without any system of social controls. Benefits are not meted out according to a narrow calculus of genealogical relatedness or likelihood of return gain. Instead, the group is united by a system of beliefs and practices that is essentially moral in tone. There is right conduct and wrong conduct and the latter invites punishment, not only by animals and their spirits but also by disapproving Chewong.[14]() The moral system makes it hard to identify what counts as altruistic, but it obviously discourages behaviors that “emphasize the individual at the expense of the social”—to use Howell’s words. I do not mean to imply that the system works perfectly and eliminates all self-serving behaviors. However the system appears designed for this purpose and by Howell’s account works fairly well. If we conduct a thought experiment in which the system is eliminated, it is likely that food sharing would decline. The system has an otherworldly side that superficially appears irrational and dysfunctional. What simple people, to fear that unfulfilled desires invite attacks from animals and their spirits! Yet, a closer look reveals an impressive functionality with respect to the most practical aspects of Chewong life. We would be foolish to attribute function to each and every nuance of Chewong society, but we would be equally foolish to dismiss the possibility of function altogether. Remember that we are striving for the middle ground.

INNATE PSYCHOLOGY OF MORAL SYSTEMS

It is clear that our understanding of human social evolution must be brought within the paradigm of major transitions. We must go beyond kin selection and reciprocity to model a complex regulatory system that binds members of a group into a functional unit. Evolutionary biologists have only begun this endeavor, so it is important to emphasize the tentative nature of their conclusions. In the [introduction]() I said that this book is about science in motion, full of inconsistencies and loose ends that will only be resolved in the future. Nevertheless, it is even more interesting to describe the game in progress than to report the final score. In this spirit, we need to reconcile two seemingly contradictory facts: the fact that moral systems require innate psychological mechanisms, and the fact that they can rapidly evolve by cultural evolution.

Beginning with psychological mechanisms, there is a long tradition in the human sciences of trying to explain as much as possible with a few general principles, such as operant conditioning or rational choice, as if the laws of behavior are like the laws of physics. In contrast, evolutionary psychologists such as Cosmides and Tooby (2001; see also Tooby and Cosmides 1992) stress that the mind is not a single general-purpose organ but a collection of many organs that adapt organisms to specific aspects their environments. Migratory birds stare at the night sky as nestlings and learn the center of rotation, which they use as adults to travel north and south (Emlen 1975). The neural circuitry that makes this possible evolved in migratory birds but not in other species. It solves only one problem of survival and reproduction. Other problems such as feeding and mating require different specialized circuits. The desert ant *Cataglyphis bicolor* takes a meandering route in search of food but carries it in a straight path back to the colony. Its tiny mind actually represents the meandering path as a series of vectors with known length and direction with respect to the sun, which enables the direction of the starting point to be “calculated” when it is time to return (Wehner and Srinvasan 1981).[15]() This is only one specialized circuit that is packed into the tiny mind of the ant; other circuits are required to cope with other problems of survival and reproduction. The ability to navigate by the stars or to dead reckon by the sun appear miraculous to us because they exceed our own ability, at least without extensive training. However, our minds are also packed with specialized circuits that enable us to solve our own problems of survival and reproduction as naturally as celestial navigation in birds and dead reckoning in ants. Psychologists should be trying to identify and understand these specialized circuits rather than pretending that human behavior can be derived from a few law-like mechanistic principles.

Even without knowing the details, this basic conclusion almost certainly applies to our ability as a species to form into functional groups unified by moral systems. Like adaptations in other species, it requires a specialized, genetically evolved cognitive architecture of its own. A number of authors have speculated on the design features required for a moral system to work, including conformity (Boyd and Richerson 1985; E. O. Wilson 1998), docility (Simon 1990), detection of cheating (Cosmides and Tooby 1992), punishment of cheating (Boyd and Richerson 1992), symbolic thought (Deacon 1998), explicit consensus decision making (Boehm 1996), and so on. Much more work is required to refine these possibilities, but the general expectation is that small groups of people are psychologically prepared to bind themselves into functional units. Take one hundred people from anywhere, place them on a deserted island where they have a reason to work together, and they will make a pretty good job of it. Perhaps they will split into two groups of fifty that try to exterminate each other, but whether the common problem is a hostile environment or a hostile group, working together as a group comes naturally in our species, just as celestial navigation comes naturally to migratory birds and dead reckoning to desert ants.

It is important to stress that the phrase “comes naturally” does not imply that the underlying mechanisms are simple. Vision comes naturally but requires an amazing array of innate cognitive mechanisms. These mechanisms interact during development with features of the environment that are so reliable that all normal people can see without having to think about it. The cognition is automated and takes place beneath our conscious awareness. Similarly, our ability to function as groups may require sophisticated cognitive mechanisms that appear effortless only because they are automated. Decades were required to understand the neurobiology of vision, and a similar effort may be required to understand the neurobiology of moral systems.

The concept of an innate psychology of functional groups is not just a radical conjecture of evolutionary biologists. It is supported by some of the most distinguished research programs in the social sciences. One of the most famous studies in social psychology is the robber’s cave experiment (Sherif et al. 1961), in which boys at a summer camp spontaneously formed into warring tribes which nevertheless could be brought together into a single cooperative group by confronting them with a common problem. A branch of social psychology known as social identity theory shows how easily people think of themselves as members of groups, especially in opposition to other groups (Abrams and Hogg 1990, 1999). Social dilemma experiments demonstrate the fragility of cooperation in the absence of punishment but the ease with which it is achieved when the opportunity for punishment is allowed (e.g., Ostrom et al. 1994). A book aptly entitled *Order without Law* (Ellickson 1991) shows how people spontaneously establish, enforce, and largely abide by social norms in the absence of a formal legal system. Tocqueville, the French social theorist who observed American democracy with such insight, was equally perceptive about small-scale human society in general when he said that “the village or township is the only association which is so perfectly natural that, wherever a number of men are collected, it seems to constitute itself” (\[1835\] 1990, 60). There is great opportunity for a synthesis on this subject between the established branches of the social sciences and evolutionary biology, upon which all functional explanations must ultimately rest.

Applying these insights to the study of religion, we should not think of religion as a purely cultural invention or as something that can be derived from a few law-like principles. Organisms of all sorts require a complex and specialized physiology to coordinate their parts in just the right way to survive and reproduce in their environments. We should think of the psychological mechanisms activated by religion as physiological in this sense.

CULTURAL EVOLUTION OF MORAL SYSTEMS

The second basic fact that we must understand from an evolutionary perspective is that moral systems include an open-ended cultural dimension in addition to an innate psychological dimension. Our genetically evolved minds make it possible to have a moral system, but the specific contents of moral systems can change within groups and vary widely among groups, with important consequences for survival and reproduction. Far from leading to the caricature of genetic determinism that limits the capacity for change, our innate psychology creates a capacity for change by setting in motion a process of cultural evolution.

Although culture has for many decades been envisioned as an evolutionary process, there is little agreement about its precise nature, importance, or relationship to genetic evolution. The most severe critics of sociobiology rely upon culture as an alternative, which they think can be studied without reference to biology (e.g., Sahlins 1976). Some biologists regard culture as a handmaiden of genetic evolution that evolves the same phenotypic adaptations, only faster (e.g., Alexander 1979, 1987). Other biologists try to decompose culture into gene-like units that do not necessarily benefit their human hosts (e.g., Dawkins 1976; Blackmore 1999). Instead, they can act more like disease organisms as they spread from head to head.[16]()

To find our way through this wilderness of possibilities, let’s begin with the image of the mind as a collection of specialized organs, which I emphasized in the previous section. The reason the organs must be specialized is supposedly because general-purpose cognitive organs are not possible (Tooby and Cosmides 1992; Cosmides and Tooby 2001). The first artificial intelligence researchers naively thought that they could build smart general-purpose learning machines, but they soon discovered that the only way to make a machine smart is to make it specialized for a particular task. Chess playing computers are smart at playing chess but can’t do anything else. Similarly, the neural circuit that enables migratory birds to learn the axis of rotation of the night sky can’t do anything else. In general, the world is so full of stimuli and possible responses to stimuli that a smart machine, or a smart cognitive organ, must be very selective about its perception and use of information. As a Chinese proverb states, a wise man knows what to ignore.

These are valid observations, but they have been used by Cosmides, Tooby, and others most closely associated with the term “evolutionary psychology” to build an incomplete picture of the human mind as like a juke-box, in which the records are preevolved cognitive modules and the environment is the button-pusher.[17]() Whatever module that is playing at the moment requires information about the environment in the same way that a computer program requires the input of information. For example, suppose that you are riding on a bus and a member of the opposite sex sits across from you. Out pops your mate choice module, which causes you to scan the person for information relevant to their quality as a mate; their age, health, resources, availability, and so on. A degree of learning takes place during this process but it is highly formulaic. Just as a tax preparation program tells you what you owe after “learning” your income, business expenses, and so on, the mate choice module tells you how attractive the person is after “learning” his or her salient qualities.

Once again, the problem with this portrayal of human mentality is not that it is wrong but that it is partial (Wilson 1994, 1999b, 2002). Against the background of all-purpose learning theory (what Cosmides and Tooby call the “Standard Social Sciences Model” or SSSM), it is full of insights and possibilities. By itself, however, it seems to deny learning, development, and cultural change as open-ended processes. Learning, as we have seen, becomes highly circumscribed information processing. Development becomes the switching on and off of modules during various stages of the life cycle. Culture becomes a reflection of individual behavioral flexibility. If people in different locations experience different environments, different modules will be triggered which in turn will lead to different behaviors. We might call these differences cultural but they have nothing to do with socially transmitted information per se.[18]()

Self-described evolutionary psychologists might complain that I am caricaturing their position. Perhaps I am—but not by much. A glance at the index of David Buss’s *Evolutionary Psychology: Toward a New Psychology of the Mind* reveals that only one page is devoted to “learning,” seven pages to “development,” and seven pages to “culture.” The contents of these pages are as I have described in the previous paragraph (see Wilson 1999b for a detailed critique). The bulk of the book and the field that it represents employs the same algorithm again and again: For any particular feature of human behavior and psychology, try to understand it as a genetically evolved adaptation to a feature of the ancestral environment. Then try to imagine the psychological mechanism as a specialized module.

In this algorithm, everything that has taken place since the advent of agriculture counts for nothing, other than as a source of maladaptive behavior. Why do we overeat? Because we are genetically adapted to crave fats and sugars in the food-poor ancestral environment, which places us at the mercy of every fast-food restaurant in today’s food-rich environment (Stevens and Price 1996). Why are we displeased with our mates? Because the media bombards us with images of the most beautiful people on earth, making even above-average people appear like toads by comparison. In the ancestral environment, the comparison pool would be at most a few hundred individuals (Buss 1999). Why do we often behave stupidly in psychological experiments? Because we are not given information in the form of frequencies, which is how we were designed to receive information in the ancestral environment (Gigerenzer and Hoffrage 1995). The algorithm provides no explanation for why the modern environment became so different from the ancestral environment, but merely accepts the fact and tries to deal with it, like a biologist trying to study a species of rain forest lizard that has mysteriously been transported into the desert.

I must stress once again that I like these ideas, which have led to many valid insights that are new against the background of traditional psychological research. I myself have already stressed the importance of innate psychology in the study of human moral systems. My complaint is not that the algorithm is wrong but that it is partial, seeming to exclude the possibility of learning, development, culture, and other aspects of human mentality as open-ended processes. To broaden the horizon, we need to return to the question of whether cognitive processes must be specialized to be smart.

Consider the mammalian immune system. Just like the mind, it can be regarded as a collection of specialized genetically evolved mechanisms for helping us survive and reproduce in our ancestral environment. The number and sophistication of the mechanisms that comprise the immune system are mind-boggling when understood in detail. Nevertheless, the centerpiece of the immune system is an open-ended process of blind variation and selective retention. Antibodies are produced at random and those that successfully fight invading disease organisms are selected. Diseases are so numerous and evolve so fast with their short generation times that the only way to fight them is with another evolutionary process.

This comparison, between the mind and the immune system, is simple but profound in its implications.[19]() It shows that genetic evolution does not invariably lead to the kind of modularity that excludes open-ended processes. Instead, it can create processes that are themselves evolutionary and therefore capable of providing new solutions to new problems. Plotkin (1994) has aptly termed these processes “Darwin machines,” two words that reflect the essential components of an evolved system that includes evolution within its own structure. “Machine” indicates that the internal evolutionary process must be highly managed to lead to biologically adaptive outcomes. Antibodies that match antigens reproduce more, not by chance, but because the immune system has been constructed that way. “Darwin” indicates that the internal process remains evolutionary despite being managed, with all the implications associated with genetic evolution played out on a new stage. Adaptation to recent (not ancient) environments is perhaps the most important implication, but we should also expect the same kinds of historical contingencies and other constraining factors that cause adaptations to fall short of perfection.

Thinking of the mind as like the immune system allows us to appreciate its genetically evolved and highly specialized features without denying its open-ended potential. Against this background, we can return to the subjects of cultural evolution, moral systems, and religion. As many authors have noted, there was no single human ancestral environment but rather many environments that varied over time and space. The physical environment was exceptionally variable during our emergence as a species, due to unstable climatic conditions (Richerson and Boyd 2000). In addition, human social interactions have the same what-I-do-depends-on-what-you-do quality that marks the interactions between hosts and their disease organisms. When physical and social environments become sufficiently variable, juke-box solutions are inadequate and the only recourse is to evolve Darwin machines.

Cultural evolution can be seen in part as a Darwin machine in action, highly managed but nevertheless genuinely open-ended in its outcome. Confront a human group with a novel problem, even one that never existed in the so-called ancestral environment, and its members may well come up with a workable solution. The solution might be based on trial and error or on rational thought. However, rational thought is itself a Darwin machine, rapidly generating and selecting symbolic representations inside the head. Confront many human groups with the same novel problem and they will come up with different solutions, some much better than others. If the groups are isolated from each other, they may never converge on the best solution; evolution is not such a deterministic process. If the groups are in contact, they might compare solutions and the worst might quickly imitate the best. If convergence by imitation does not occur, then the worst might simply succumb to the best in between-group interactions. Either way, the final outcome is a degree of adaptation to the problem, without any genetic evolution taking place at all. Evolution took place, but not at the genetic level.

This description of human cultural evolution sounds so familiar that the reader might wonder if I have said anything new. Scientific progress does not always involve replacing the familiar with the counterintuitive. Some things are familiar because they are true. A good theory acknowledges the valid aspects of the familiar and goes on to achieve a new level of understanding. In this spirit, multilevel selection theory contributes at least four major insights to the “familiar” process of cultural evolution.

First, cultural evolution requires specialized mechanisms—the machine part of the Darwin machine. Familiar-sounding terms such as “trial and error,” “rational thought,” and “imitation” probably don’t even begin to describe the number and sophistication of the mechanisms that actually guide the process of cultural evolution. More generally, thinking of cultural evolution as itself a product of genetic evolution with many sophisticated design features is anything but familiar.

Second, many of the mechanisms guiding cultural evolution take place beneath conscious awareness. We have a tendency to attribute too much importance to conscious rational thought. We imagine ourselves solving problems by explicitly thinking, talking, experimenting, imitating, and so on. These conscious processes are important agents of cultural change (Boehm 1996), but they are the tip of an iceberg of automated cognitive processes that take place beneath our conscious awareness, some of which are very sophisticated. This means that cultures can evolve to be smart in ways that are invisible to their own members.

Third, the mechanisms guiding cultural evolution can be distributed processes involving many individuals rather than being processes contained within single individuals. There is a pervasive tendency both in biology and in the human sciences to regard individuals as self-contained cognitive units. An individual might rely on outside information and might decide to cooperate with others, but it is still the individual’s decision. The evolutionary justification for this claim is as follows: A brain is a group of neurons whose members interact intricately for the common good. There is a big difference between a brain and a single neuron; most of what we attribute to the mind involves the circuitry connecting the neurons, not the on/off states of the neurons themselves. The reason that neurons in a brain act for their common good is because they exist within a single individual organism that survives and reproduces as a unit. Brains are self-contained cognitive units because individuals are units of selection.

This reasoning, along with so much else that until recently appeared on solid ground, must be questioned in the light of multilevel selection theory. If the individual is no longer a privileged unit of selection, it is no longer a privileged unit of cognition. We are free to imagine individuals in a social group connected in a circuitry that gives the group the status of the brain and the individual the status of the neuron.

The concept of a group brain might seem like science fiction, but only against the background of the last fifty years of intellectual thought. As I mentioned earlier, the founding fathers of the human social sciences were fully comfortable with the idea of group organisms, complete with group minds (Wegner 1986). Moreover, modern social insect biologists have established the reality of group minds in impressive detail (Seeley 1995; Detrain et al. 1999). An example from honeybees will help to restore our intuition for our own species.

The challenges of survival for a honeybee colony are awesome when sufficiently appreciated. To function adaptively, the colony must make decisions on an hourly basis about which flower patches to visit and which to ignore over an area of several square miles, whether to gather nectar, pollen, or water, the allocation of workers to foraging vs. hive maintenance, and so on. In an elegant series of experiments, T. D. Seeley and his colleagues worked out in detail how some of these decisions are actually made (reviewed by Seeley 1995). In one experiment, a colony in which every bee was individually marked was taken deep into the Adirondack woods where virtually no natural resources were available. The colony was then provided with artificial nectar sources whose quality could be experimentally manipulated. When the quality of a food patch was lowered below alternative patches, the colony responded by shifting workers away from the patch, yet individual bees visited only one patch and therefore had no frame of comparison. Instead, individuals contributed one link to a chain of events that allowed the comparison to be made at the colony level. Bees returning from the low-quality patch danced less and themselves were less likely to revisit. With fewer bees returning from the poor resource, bees from better patches were able to unload their nectar faster, which they used as a cue to dance more. Newly recruited bees were therefore directed to the best patches. Adaptive foraging decisions were made by a decentralized process in which individuals acted more as neurons than as decision-making agents in their own right. Even the physical architecture of the hive, such as the location and dimensions of the dance floor, honeycomb, and brood chambers, has been shown to play an important role in the cognitive architecture of adaptive decision making at the group level.

A more recently documented example of group cognition in honeybees involves the selection of a new site (Seeley and Buhrman 1999). When the colony becomes large enough to split, the old queen departs with about half the workers and forms an exposed mass of bees called a swarm from which scouts emanate to search for suitable sites. Scouts returning from different sites interact on the surface of the swarm in such a way that the best site is chosen. As with foraging for nectar, however, no single scout visits more than one site, so decision making is a distributed process that requires a group of bees interacting in just the right way. This example is instructive because it is equivalent to a “best-of-n” decision-making algorithm that is also employed by individual humans (Payne et al. 1993). The algorithm is the same, regardless of whether it involves a group of neurons or a group of bees.

Social insect colonies have taken the concept of group minds and group organisms beyond the realm of mysticism and science fiction. In addition, it is entirely likely that the same concepts apply to our own species (Wilson 1997). As much as we might laud the individual human mind, its capacity is vastly exceeded by the demands of language and culture that are the hallmark of our species and that evolved in tandem with human brain evolution. Theories of human evolution frequently emphasize various forms of cooperation in the context of physical activities (e.g., hunting, intergroup warfare); why not also in the context of mental activities? If widespread cognitive cooperation did evolve in our species, we need be no more aware of the role that we play in the group mind than honey bees as they perform their waggle-dance.

The fourth insight that multilevel selection theory contributes to the “familiar” process of cultural evolution is that such evolution takes place largely at the group level. Cultural evolution is not merely a handmaiden of genetic evolution but changes the parameters of the evolutionary process, favoring traits that would not evolve by genetic evolution alone (Boyd and Richerson 1985; Boehm 1999; Wilson and Kniffin 1999). To understand the significance of this statement, consider a genetic mutation that occurs in a large population that is subdivided into groups. There is now genetic variation both within groups (the single mutant vs. everyone else in the group) and between groups (a group with a single mutant vs. many groups with no mutant). The gene can be favored by group selection if the mutant individual single-handedly increases the fitness of its group, relative to other groups, but this advantage must be weighed against the fitness of the individual, relative to the other members of the same group. The group effect is likely to be more powerful if the groups are small (e.g., 1 out of 5) than large (e.g., 1 out of 1,000). Group selection would work better if we could concentrate mutants into a single group, but it is not obvious how this can happen if the mutant gene is at a low frequency in the total population. These are some of the limiting factors that set the tone of the group selection debate in the 1960s.

Now consider a cultural mutation; a new belief or practice that arises in one group by chance, rational thought, or any other process. Unlike the genetic mutation, the cultural mutation need not remain at a low frequency within the group. A variety of factors can swiftly make the mutant behavior the majority or even the exclusive behavior practiced by the group. Perhaps members think explicitly about the new belief or practice, appreciate its wisdom, and establish it as the new norm. Perhaps they follow it “mindlessly” because it is espoused by a charismatic member of the group. If the mutant behavior is altruistic (when practiced voluntarily), its costs and benefits can be modified by the full panoply of social control mechanisms available in our species. These factors can cause a rare behavior to become common even in very large groups. In short, cultural evolution increases the potency of selection among groups and decreases the potency of selection within groups, compared to what would be expected on the basis of genetic evolution alone. This is not an inevitable consequence of cultural evolution, but it is how cultural evolution appears to work in our species—a design feature of a Darwin machine.[20]()

Applying these insights to the study of religion, we should think of religious groups as rapidly evolving entities adapting to their current environments. Religions appeal to many people in part because they promise transformative change—a path to salvation. The word evolution means change, so it would seem that evolution and religion share much in common. It is unfortunate that evolution is so often associated with genetic evolution, a slow process that gives the impression of an incapacity for change over the time scales that matter most to living people struggling with their problems. When we expand our view of evolution to include all Darwinian processes, we can begin to see how religions actually can produce transformative change, even from a purely evolutionary perspective.

MODERN HUMAN GROUPS AS ADAPTIVE UNITS

Most modern societies are vastly different from the hunter-gatherer groups of the ancient past. Although significant genetic evolution can occur in a small number of generations (Endler 1986; Weiner 1994), the basic genetic architecture of the human mind has probably not changed much since the advent of agriculture approximately ten thousand years ago. As we have seen, when evolution is interpreted too narrowly as genetic evolution, all of recorded history becomes a mystery from an evolutionary perspective, something that happened but cannot be explained. The best we can do is try to understand how the stone-age mind is likely to react to the strange new world for which it is not prepared. An expanded view of evolution allows us to interpret recorded history as a fossil record of cultural evolution in action. As with genetic multilevel selection, a cultural variant can spread at the expense of other variants within a group, or by causing its group to spread at the expense of other groups.

Superficially, large-scale human societies appear much less egalitarian than hunter-gatherer groups, but the apparent inequities can be interpreted in two very different ways. On the one hand, social control mechanisms are probably strongest in small groups in which everyone knows and depends on everyone else. Many inequities that exist in large-scale societies are therefore exactly what they seem—some individuals profiting at the expense of others within the society. These should not be interpreted as group-level adaptations but rather as individual-level adaptations with consequences that are often dysfunctional at the society level. On the other hand, purely from the group-level functional standpoint, societies must become differentiated as they increase in size. Thirty people can sit around the campfire and arrive at a consensual decision; thirty million people cannot. It is therefore an open question whether extreme status differences and other seeming inequalities in large-scale societies represent domination pure and simple or rather design features that enable the society to function at a large scale, especially in competition with other societies. There can be little doubt that size itself can be a group-level adaptation. Larger societies tend to replace smaller societies unless their larger size is offset by problems of coordination and internal conflicts of interest. It is possible to imagine major transitions occurring in cultural evolution, in which smaller groups coalesce into larger groups, just as for long-term biological evolution.

Our progress so far can be summarized as follows. Organismic groups do not automatically evolve but require a process of group selection. Group selection can be a potent evolutionary force, despite its widespread rejection during the age of individualism. In fact, the organisms of today are the social groups of past ages, which have become so functionally integrated that we see the whole more than the parts. These developments in evolutionary biology make the organismic view of human society a legitimate possibility—at least to a degree. Human societal organisms rely critically on moral systems to define appropriate behaviors and to prevent subversion from within. Moral systems have an innate psychological dimension but also an open-ended dimension that allows human history to be seen as a fast-paced evolutionary process with cultural rather than genetic mechanisms of inheritance.

Two more issues need to be discussed to complete our survey of evolutionary concepts relevant to the study of religion. First, we must take a closer look at the concept of fitness. Second, we must ask why morality is so often expressed in the form of religion, which seems so different from other modes of thought.

WHAT CONSTITUTES FITNESS?

Studying religion (or any other subject) from an evolutionary perspective requires a clear definition of fitness. Sometimes it is obvious how an organism must be structured to survive and reproduce in its environment. Flight requires certain aerodynamic shapes, and the efficiency of a bird’s wing can be measured with the same precision as the efficiency of an airplane’s wing. The efficiency of behaviors can also be measured with precision. Traveling salesmen must move between cities to sell their wares. There are many ways to construct a path through a number of cities, in fact so many ways that even large computers cannot evaluate them all. Nevertheless, we can easily test whether traveling salesmen choose relatively efficient paths. We can also test whether hummingbirds choose relatively efficient paths on their trips from flower to flower.

It is important to remember that the evidence for design in nature is so compelling that it cries out for an explanation. The great question in Darwin’s day was not “Is there any function in nature?” but “What explains all the function that we see in nature?” Thus, at a certain basic level the question “what constitutes fitness” can have a satisfying and highly intuitive answer. However, a closer look reveals a host of complicating factors that can make fitness difficult to define and study (Michod 1999a).

One of the complicating factors has already been discussed and forms the heart of this book: Fitness is a relative concept. It doesn’t matter how well an organism survives and reproduces. It only matters that it survives and reproduces better than alternative types of organisms. Males of some species are adapted to kill infants, which enables them to mate with the infants’ mothers faster than they could otherwise (Van Schaik and Janson 2000). This behavior is not adaptive for the infants, the mothers, the group, the species, or the ecosystem. It is adaptive only for the males, compared to males who behave otherwise. Nevertheless, these males must be regarded as fit from an evolutionary perspective. Some species of bees have evolved to drink nectar without becoming dusted with pollen, by chewing a hole in the base of the flower. This behavior is not adaptive for the flower-bearing plants or even the bee species, which depends upon the plants for its long-term survival. It is adaptive only for the individual bee, compared to bees who behave otherwise. It is hard to avoid a feeling of moral revulsion at calling such behaviors fit when they are so destructive to other organisms and even the “fit” organism itself over the long term. As we have seen, group selection is a partial solution to this problem. Groups of males who do not kill each other’s infants might survive and reproduce better than other groups. The feeling of moral revulsion that I just described can itself be explained as part of the innate psychology of moral systems that evolved by group selection to suppress self-serving behaviors in our own species. But alas, group selection merely takes us out of the frying pan of within-group interactions and into the fire of between-group interactions. Those groups of males who do not kill each other’s offspring might well kill the offspring and appropriate the females from other groups (Wrangham and Peterson 1997).

These points must be kept firmly in mind when we proceed to our study of religion. Whenever I strike up a conversation about religion, I am likely to receive a litany of evils perpetrated in God’s name. In most cases, these are horrors committed by religious groups against other groups. How can I call religion adaptive in the face of such evidence? The answer is “easily,” as long as we understand fitness in relative terms. It is important to stress that a behavior can be explained from an evolutionary perspective without being morally condoned. Immoral behaviors almost invariably benefit the immoral individual or group; why else would immorality be a temptation? Evolution is not required to tell us something so basic. Religious discussions of self-will are a breath away from evolutionary discussions of self-interest. Open-minded religious believers are perfectly aware that solving the problem of self-will within religious groups can lead to even greater problems of group-will with respect to other groups. These parallels between religious and evolutionary thought are not coincidental; they both spring from the fundamental problem of social life and its partial solution that lies at the heart of religion and which can be explained by multilevel selection theory.

Not only is fitness a relative concept, but it is also a local concept. The English system of measuring in feet and inches is inferior to the metric system, but it persists in certain populations because it is common. The cost of switching to the metric system outweigh the benefits, at least over the short term. This is known as a majority effect, and examples abound in both biological and cultural evolution. IBM-compatibles have an advantage over Apple computers and Microsoft Word has an advantage over other word processing programs because of the majority effect. These examples do not violate the principle of evolution as a fitness-maximizing process but simply illustrate its local nature, which is often illustrated with the metaphor of an adaptive landscape.[21]() Imagine the English measurement system as a meager hill of low fitness and the metric system as a taller hill of high fitness. Evolution is a hill-climbing process, but if it starts out on the slope of the meager hill, all it can do is climb to the top of that hill. Moving from a short hill to a tall hill requires crossing a valley of low fitness and is actually resisted by the evolutionary process. The more rugged the adaptive landscape, the more an evolving system will reflect its original starting point (the particular hill upon whose slope it landed) and will fail to find the best global solution.[22]()

A third complication involves mechanisms of inheritance. The sickle cell gene (S) in humans is an adaptation to malaria, but it does not spread to fixation because it is only advantageous in heterozygotic form (AS). As a homozygote (SS) it leads to debilitating anemia. The result is a genetic polymorphism in which some individuals are protected from malaria (AS) while many others are either unprotected (AA) or suffer from a genetic defect (SS). Some adaptation! In general, the more we complicate the mechanisms of genetic inheritance, making genes fit in some combinations but unfit in others, the messier the process of adaptation becomes.

A fourth complication involves modes of transmission. In diploid organisms such as ourselves, most genes exist in the autosomes and are inherited from both parents, but some genes exist in the cytoplasm and are inherited only from the mother. All cytoplasmic genes in males are doomed to extinction because they will not enter the male’s sperm. A mutant gene that causes females to raise daughters instead of sons will be favored by natural selection if the gene is cytoplasmic but not if it is autosomal. Similarly, a gene that causes males to raise sons instead of daughters will be favored if it is located on the y-chromosome, which is transmitted only through males. These conflicts of interest among genes reveal that even individual organisms fall short of the ideal of internal harmony implied by the word “organism” (Pomiankowski 1999). The fact that fitness depends on the mode of transmission has important implications for models of cultural evolution, which include many possible modes of transmission (Boyd and Richerson 1985).

A fifth complication involves distinguishing the product of natural selection from the process. An adaptation is a product of natural selection and is expected to be well designed with respect to the environment. However, the process of natural selection involves many failures for each success. Like laws and sausages, the manufacture of adaptations is not a pretty sight! Religious experiments that fail are not an argument against evolution, if we are observing the process in addition to the product. The question is whether religious experiments that succeed do so on the basis of their properties, and whether these properties are transmitted (with modification) to subsequent religions.

All of these complications (and others) are important and must be kept in mind as we proceed to our study of religion. However, they should not obscure the progress that can be made at a basic level. Religions are often concerned with the necessities of life—food, shelter, health, safety, marriage, child development, social relations of all sorts. These are so obviously related to survival and reproduction that, at least to a first approximation, we needn’t puzzle over the details any more than Darwin needed to puzzle over the details of a thick beak useful for cracking hard seeds. In addition, it is often clear enough whether people are obtaining the necessities of life at the expense of others or by coordinating with others. The fundamental problem of social life and the role of religion in its (partial) solution are too basic to be obscured by the many complications surrounding the concept of fitness, or so I will try to show.

THE RELIGIOUS EXPRESSION OF MORALITY

So far I have said much about evolution, human evolution, morality, and culture, but little about religion per se. Even if we accept that moral systems enable human groups to function as adaptive units, what accounts for the religious expression of morality? Why can’t people just talk about right and wrong in practical terms without appealing to supernatural agents and other beliefs that to a nonbeliever seem detached from reality? Religion attracts the attention of scientists (and often the scorn of nonbelievers) in part because it seems to flaunt the canons of scientific thought. For many people, the otherworldly nature of religion is more interesting and important to explain than its communal nature.

One possibility is that religions are naive scientific theories, attempts by simple people to understand their complex world that just happen to be false. Religious folk should abandon their beliefs in the face of superior knowledge and if they don’t they are being irrational. This idea surfaces again and again in casual discussions and also forms the basis of more formal theories of religion (Frazer 1890; Tylor 1871). However, it fails to fit the facts. In the first place, people in all cultures—even the most “primitive”—possess the foundation of scientific thought: a sophisticated factual understanding of their world and the ability to reason on the basis of evidence (Malinowski 1948; Boehm 1978). They do not live in an otherworldly fog in all respects. The fog—if that is what it deserves to be called—only descends in some contexts. In the second place, there is no evidence that scientific understanding replaces religious belief in modern cultures. America has become more religious over the course of its history, not less, despite the influence of science and engineering (Finke and Stark 1992). A very high proportion of scientists themselves profess a belief in God and participate in organized religions (Stark and Finke 2000). Clearly, we must think of religious thought as something that coexists with scientific thought, not as an inferior version of it.

A proper understanding of epistemology from an evolutionary perspective can shed light on this issue. Before Darwin, the human ability to know (i.e., to accurately perceive the properties of the external world) could be explained as a gift from God. After Darwin, numerous philosophers and biologists tried to place epistemology on an evolutionary foundation by saying that the ability to know is adaptive (Bradie 1986). Those who did it well survived and reproduced while those who did it poorly were not among our ancestors. This argument has an element of truth; clearly, I need to accurately perceive the location of a rabbit to hit it with my throwing stick. However, there are many, many other situations in which it can be adaptive to distort reality (Wilson 1990, 1995). Even massively fictitious beliefs can be adaptive, as long as they motivate behaviors that are adaptive in the real world. At best, our vaunted ability to know is just one tool in a mental toolkit that is frequently passed over in favor of other tools—just as we observe in all cultures, including our own.

From this perspective, we should expect moral systems to frequently depart from narrow reasoning on the basis of factual evidence. Once this kind of reasoning is removed from its pedestal as the only adaptive way to think, a host of alternatives become available. Emotions are evolved mechanisms for motivating adaptive behavior that are far more ancient than the cognitive processes typically associated with scientific thought. We might therefore expect moral systems to be designed to trigger powerful emotional impulses, linking joy with right, fear with wrong, anger with transgressions. We might expect stories, music, and rituals to be at least as important as logical arguments in orchestrating the behavior of groups. Supernatural agents and events that never happened can provide blueprints for action that far surpass factual accounts of the natural world in clarity and motivating power. These otherworldly elements of religion cannot completely eclipse scientific modes of thought, which are superior in some contexts, but the reverse statement is equally true.

A second example of hunter-gatherer morality will make our discussion less abstract. The following passage from Turnbull (1965, 180) describes how men of the Mbuti tribe, which inhabits the rain forest of equatorial Africa, make decisions on a consensus basis:

Njobo was an undisputed great hunter, knew the territory as well as anyone and had killed four elephants single-handed. He was a good enough Mbuti not to attempt to dominate any hunting discussion in the forest, merely to take a normal part. If he ever appeared to be overly aggressive or insistent he was shouted down and ridiculed, although highly popular. He was also the one chosen to represent the band to the villagers. Ekianga, on the other hand, was less generally popular and was the source of some friction, having three wives (one the sister of another prominent member of the band), but he was a fine hunter, endowed with exceptional physical stamina, and he too knew the territory well. Even at the height of his unpopularity he was one of the most effective “leaders” of the hunt. So was Nikiabo, a youth who had achieved some notoriety by killing a buffalo when barely out of childhood. Although a bachelor, he had a net of his own and took a prominent part in all hunting discussions. Makubasi, a young married hunter, was also accorded special respect because of his hunting prowess and his physical strength, combined with his knowledge of the territory. But while these four can be singled out as exceptional, they could either separately or together be outvoted by the rest of the hunters. On such occasions they were compelled either to give their assent to the popular decision or to refrain from joining the hunt that day. None of them had the slightest authority over the others. Nor was any moral pressure brought to bear in influencing a decision through personal considerations or respect. The only such moral consideration ever mentioned was that when the band arrived at a decision, it was considered “good” and that it would “please the forest.” Anyone not associating himself with the decision was, then, likely to displease the forest, and this was considered “bad.” Any individual intent on strengthening his own argument might appeal to the forest on grounds that his point of view was “good” and “pleasing”; only the ultimate general decision, however, would determine the validity of his claim.

This passage provides a fine illustration of hunter-gatherer egalitarianism, in which the will of the group prevails over the will of the strongest individuals, at least some of whom would gladly become more dominant in the absence of social controls. Their decision about where to hunt almost certainly relied upon practical reasoning on the basis of detailed factual knowledge that we associate with scientific thought. Nevertheless, this mode of thought blended seamlessly with belief in a forest capable of experiencing pleasure, which happens to correspond to the welfare of the group. It is interesting to ask why Mbuti thought took this “irrational” turn when discussion of shared interest could have remained on a purely pragmatic and “rational” plane. However, the answer to this question must be based primarily on the adaptedness of the actions motivated by alternative modes of thought. Once the reasoning associated with scientific thought loses its status as the only adaptive way to think, other forms of thought associated with religion cease to be objects of scorn and incomprehension and can be studied as potential adaptations in their own right.

SURVEYING THE VIEW FROM EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY

The main purpose of this book is to treat the organismic concept of religious groups as a serious scientific hypothesis. The contribution of this chapter is to review the relevant concepts in evolutionary biology. We have covered an enormous amount of ground and touched upon many complex issues, but the basic argument can be briefly and simply stated: Natural selection is a multilevel process that operates among groups in addition to among individuals within groups. Any unit becomes endowed with the properties inherent in the word organism to the degree that it is a unit of selection. The history of life on earth has been marked by many transitions from groups of organisms to groups as organisms. Organismic groups achieve their unity with mechanisms that suppress selection within groups without themselves being overtly altruistic. Human evolution falls within the paradigm of multilevel selection and the major transitions of life. Moral systems provide many of the mechanisms that enable human groups to function as adaptive units. Moral systems include both an innate psychological component and an open-ended cultural component that enables groups to adapt to their recent environments. Belief in supernatural agents and other elements that are associated specifically with religion can play an important role in the structure and function of moral communities.

In the [Introduction]() I stated that science works best when it tests among well-framed hypotheses that make different predictions about measurable aspects of the world. Evolutionary theory offers not one but several hypotheses about religion that differ in their predictions, as shown in [table 1.1](). The most important division concerns adaptive vs. nonadaptive explanations. Among adaptive explanations, religion might be a group-level adaptation (the thesis of this book; see also E. O. Wilson 1998), an individual-level adaptation (Alexander 1987), or a cultural parasite that spreads at the expense of both human individuals and groups (Dawkins 1976; Boyer 1994, 2001; Blackmore 1999). Among nonadaptive explanations, religion can be interpreted as an adaptation to past environments that has become maladaptive in modern environments or as a byproduct of evolution whose function, if any, is secondary to a more general adaptive design (Guthrie 1995; Boyer 2001). In a famous essay that criticized evolutionary biologists for relying too heavily on the concept of adaptation, Gould and Lewontin (1979), themselves eminent evolutionary biologists, said that many biological structures are like a spandrel, which is the area created by two adjoining arches. Arches are clearly functional in the design of a building but spandrels are merely the byproducts of arches. These spaces are sometimes used for artistic purposes, but their “function” is secondary at best. Similarly, noses hold up our glasses, but this “function” of noses is clearly secondary to breathing and smelling. One example of a spandrel hypothesis for religion is that self-awareness evolved by natural selection for its survival value, with the unfortunate byproduct that self-aware individuals can foresee their own deaths. Religion might then have arisen to help allay the fear of death, a secondary adaptation that can be understood only in the context of a more primary adaptation (self-awareness).

The hypotheses in [table 1.1]() are used by evolutionary biologists to organize the study of many subjects. When applied to religion, they make vastly different predictions that can be pitted against each other with empirical tests. A religion designed to allay the fear of death will be different than a religion designed to promote the common good, which in turn will be different than a religion designed as a tool of within-group exploitation, which in turn will be different than a religion for which the word “design” makes no sense at all. There is ample empirical information about religion to discriminate among such different hypotheses, resulting in genuine scientific progress. In short, even if my hypothesis turns out to be incorrect, religion can and should be a subject of mainstream evolutionary research.[23]()

Throughout this chapter I have stressed the need to achieve a middle ground in which groups can and do evolve into adaptive units, but only if special conditions are met. It is definitely not my intention to adopt an extreme stance on religious groups as organismic units. I think that group selection can explain much about religion, but by no means all. Evolution is a notoriously messy process that defies single explanations. Nothing is perfectly adaptive or a product of only one level of selection. Even individual organisms have not entirely solved the fundamental problem of social life within themselves. All of the hypotheses listed in [table 1.1]() have at least some merit; our challenge is to discover their relative importance. Also, religion is not a single trait; it is a heterogeneous set of traits that might require different explanations. Finally, science involves comparing hypotheses, so all must be considered even if only one prevails.

Thus, in many respects I will be evaluating all of the hypotheses listed in [table 1.1](). However, the group selection hypothesis deserves special recognition, in part because it explains so much about religion and in part because it has been so maligned and neglected. I believe that future generations will be amazed at the degree to which groups were made to disappear as adaptive units of life in the minds of intellectuals during the second half of the twentieth century. Against this background, thinking of groups as organisms whose function requires a complex and highly organized physiology is so new, and leads to so many predictions that would not be forthcoming otherwise, that it deserves recognition even if it turns out to be only partially true.

There is another reason why group selection explains the essence of religion in a way that the other hypotheses do not. When religious believers describe their church as like a body or a beehive, they are speaking idealistically. According to the Hutterite passage quoted at the beginning of the [introduction](), it is *true* love that means growth for the whole organism. Real churches only approach the ideal of true love, but their failures are interpreted as corruptions and aberrations of religion, not as a part of religion itself. When we study religion as it is actually practiced, we see group selection contending with, and not always prevailing against, other strong forces. When we study religion as it is idealized, we see something much closer to an expression of what would evolve by pure group-level selection.

Our study of religion will repeatedly draw upon the evolutionary themes that were developed in this chapter. First, however, we must survey the view from the social sciences, where religion has already been studied for well over a century.
