CHAPTER 2

THE VIEW FROM THE SOCIAL SCIENCES

A religion is a unified system of beliefs and practices relative to sacred things . . . which unite into one single moral community called a Church, all those who adhere to them.

—Durkheim \[1912\] 1995, 44

What do human beings get from religion? According to Rodney Stark and William Bainbridge, they get what they cannot have.

—Buckser 1995, 1

The scientific study of religion has traditionally been the province of anthropologists, sociologists, and psychologists. Interest in religion began with the framers of these disciplines (e.g., Tylor 1871; Frazer 1890; Durkheim 1912; James 1902) and continues with today’s most sophisticated practitioners. Theories of religion in the social sciences have relied upon evolution to varying degrees, although the historical trend has been in the direction of less, not more. An impressive body of information has accumulated that can be used to test hypotheses, including evolutionary hypotheses that were not in mind when the data was being gathered.

As a newcomer, any modern evolutionary approach to religion must prove itself against these older traditions. One extreme possibility is that evolutionary theory triumphs over the social sciences, which totally missed the boat. Another extreme possibility is that evolutionary theory merely rediscovers what social scientists have long known. To continue the nautical metaphor, an evolutionary theory of religion might be like a rowboat joining a fleet of battleships, with nothing new to offer. A third extreme possibility is that evolutionary theory fails to explain the nature of religion; the battleships sink the rowboat.

The real situation is more complex and interesting than any of these extremes. The hypothesis that I developed in [chapter 1]() is close to a position in the social sciences known as functionalism, which was far more popular during the first half of the twentieth century than today. In fact, the demise of functionalism in the social sciences bears an eerie resemblance to the demise of multilevel selection theory in biology. Taking the organismic concept of groups seriously therefore amounts to a revival of functionalism in the social sciences—not in its original form, which in part deserved its fate, but in a form that can be justified theoretically and verified empirically.

NOW AND THEN

To survey the social science literature on religion, it will help to begin with the present state of the art. Arguably the most dynamic current research program is that of Rodney Stark, William S. Bainbridge, and their colleagues, which is an admirable blend of sociology, anthropology, history, psychology, and economics (Stark and Bainbridge 1985, 1987, 1997; Stark 1996, 1999; Finke and Stark 1992; Stark and Finke 2000). Their work is also impressive for its interplay between theory and empirical research and for the diversity of its research methods, which range from ethnographies of modern-day cults, to nationwide and worldwide survey data, to the ingenious construction of quantitative data bases from historical material. When I first approached this literature, I felt very much like a person in a rowboat pulling alongside a fleet of battleships!

Stark and his colleagues study religion from the perspective of economics and rational choice theory. Religion is envisioned as an economic exchange between people and imagined supernatural agents for goods that are scarce (e.g., rain during a drought) or impossible (e.g., immortal life) to obtain in the real world. Religious belief is therefore rational in the sense of employing cost-benefit reasoning. In addition, many details of religious belief and practice can be predicted from an economic perspective. Stark’s (1999) theory of religion is ambitious: “all aspects of religion—belief, emotion, ritual, prayer, sacrifice, mysticism, and miracle—can be understood on the basis of exchange relations between humans and supernatural beings” (264). I will hereafter refer to this as the rational choice theory of religion.

The paper from which this quotation was obtained is an update of a book-length theory of religion (Stark and Bainbridge 1987). Both versions have the virtue of presenting major propositions in the form of crisp statements accompanied by equally concise definitions of terms. This format allows me to summarize Stark’s latest version of the rational choice theory of religion in his own words, as shown in [table 2.1]().

To facilitate comparison, the hypothesis that religious groups function as adaptive units is summarized as a list of propositions in [table 2.2]().[1]() Groups consist of people who actually interact with each other with respect to the activity at hand, as discussed in [chapter 1](). Remarkably, Stark’s list fails to address the issues at the heart of my list. The essence of Stark’s theory is that goods can either be procured by human action, in which case religious belief is unnecessary (proposition 7), or goods cannot be procured by human action, in which case supernatural agents are invented to provide the unprovidable. We pray to God for everlasting life, not to convey us to work in the morning. As Buckser (1995) puts it in one of the quotations that begin this chapter, according to Stark and Bainbridge religion gives us what we cannot have. Missing entirely from this conception is the category of goods that can be procured by human action, but only by coordinated human action, and the role of religion in achieving the required coordination. In short, Stark’s theory ignores the fundamental problem of social life and the role of religion in its solution.

In evolutionary terms, Stark’s list of propositions would be classified as a byproduct, or “spandrel” explanation. Propositions 1, 2, and 3 describe psychological attributes that are highly adaptive in general and can easily be explained as a product of natural selection. However, their manifestation in the case of religion is not adaptive. If religion does not actually deliver the scarce resources that supernatural agents are invented to provide, the entire enterprise is a waste of time as far as survival and reproduction are concerned. A mutant human race with the ability to employ its psychological attributes only when they deliver worldly benefits, turning them off otherwise, would quickly replace *Homo religiosis.* Religion persists only because people cannot fine-tune their psychological attributes to this degree. Religion is on the cost side of a cost-benefit equation as far as the evolution of human psychology is concerned.

Throughout their writings, rational choice theorists tend to be highly critical of functionalism, portraying it as a dead tradition that by all means should remain buried. At times, Stark is so bitingly satirical that he seems to deny functionalists the capacity for rational thought that he grants to religious zealots. Thus, we seem to have a clear case of a byproduct theory of religion that has triumphed over a theory based on group-level adaptation. However, this impression is superficial. Before I attempt a closer analysis, we need to acquaint ourselves with the tradition of functionalism that appears to have failed so miserably.

DURKHEIM REVISITED

My main exemplar of functionalism will be Emile Durkheim’s *Elementary Forms of Religious Life* (\[1912\] 1995). Prior to Durkheim, the two most influential theories of religion were known as “animism” and “naturism.” According to animism, spiritual belief originated from the experience of dreaming, in which a phantom version of oneself appears capable of leaving the body and traveling long distances. Sleep, fainting, madness, and death all lead to the notion of a world of spirits who enter and leave human bodies at will. Once this world is imagined, it can explain anything:

In this way they constitute a veritable arsenal of causes, always at hand, never leaving the mind that is in search of explanations unequipped. Does a man seem inspired; does he speak with eloquence; does he seem lifted above both himself and the ordinary level of men? It is because a benevolent spirit is in him, animating him. Is another man taken by a seizure or by madness? An evil spirit has entered his body, agitating him. There is no sickness that cannot be put down to some such influence. In this way, the power of souls increases from all that is attributed to them, so much so that, in the end, man finds himself a captive in this imaginary world, even though he is its creator and model. He becomes the vassal of those spiritual forces that he has made with his own hands and in his own image. For if these souls are so much in control of health and illness and of good and evil things, it is wise to seek their benevolence or to appease them when they are annoyed. From thence come offering, sacrifices, prayers—in short, the whole apparatus of religious observances. (Durkheim \[1912\] 1995, 49)

Naturism also portrays the religious believer as a captive in an imaginary world of his own making, but by a different pathway: awe of the forces of nature rather than the experience of dreaming. In modern evolutionary terms, both animism and naturism would be called byproduct theories, similar in spirit, if not in detail, to Stark’s list of propositions. The human capacity for thought is broadly adaptive, but its particular manifestation in the case of religion has no function and can be costly to the extent that it misrepresents the world and leads to inappropriate behaviors. The passage quoted above even anticipates the modern concept of “selfish memes” (Dawkins 1976; Boyer 1994, 2001; Blackmore 1999), which envisions culture as a parasitic organism in its own right that exploits its human host.

Durkheim doubted that something as pervasive and influential as religion could be so dysfunctional. Early humankind lived too close to the edge of survival for such idle theorizing. Beliefs that failed to deliver practical benefits would soon be discarded in favor of more adaptive beliefs.

That man has an interest in knowing the world around him and that, consequently, his reflection was quickly applied to it, everyone will readily accept. The help of the things with which he was in immediate contact was so necessary that he inevitably tried to investigate their nature. But if, as Naturism contends, religious thought was born from these particular reflections, then it becomes inexplicable that religious thought should have survived the first tests made, and unintelligible that religious thought has been maintained. If, in fact, we have a need to know things, it is in order to act in a manner appropriate to them. But the representation of the universe that religion gives us, especially at the beginning, is too grossly incomplete to have been able to bring about practices that had secular utility. According to that representation of the universe, things are nothing less than living, thinking beings—consciousnesses and personalities like those the religious imagination has made into the agents of cosmic phenomena. So it is not by conceiving them in that form and treating them according to that notion that man could have made them helpful to him. It is not by praying to them, celebrating them in feasts and sacrifices, and imposing fasts and privations on himself that he could have prevented them from harming him or obliged them to serve his purposes. Such procedures could have succeeded only on very rare occasions—miraculously, so to speak. If the point of religion was to give us a representation of the world that would guide us in our dealings with it, then religion was in no position to carry out its function, and humanity would not have been slow to notice that fact: Failures, infinitely more common than successes, would have notified them very quickly that they were on the wrong path; and religion, constantly shaken by these constant disappointments, would have been unable to last. (Durkheim \[1912\] 1995, 76–77)

Since religious belief is such a poor representation of the natural world, its “secular utility” must reside elsewhere. Durkheim proposed that religion functions as an organizer of social life, both by defining groups and by prescribing the behaviors of its members. For Durkheim, the essence of religion was a distinction between the sacred and the profane: “A religion is a unified system of beliefs and practices relative to sacred things, that is to say, things set apart and forbidden—beliefs and practices which unite into one single moral community called a Church, all those who adhere to them” (44). The similarity between this passage and the biological concept of human groups unified by moral systems that we arrived at in [chapter 1]() is unmistakable. In modern evolutionary terms, Durkheim interpreted religion as an adaptation that enables human groups to function as harmonious and coordinated units. I take this to be the central thesis of functionalism in the social sciences as it relates to religion.

In addition to framing the central thesis, Durkheim also had a complex and sophisticated vision of exactly how religion performs its functions. He thought that a social group is such an abstract entity that it needs to be represented by a set of symbols to be comprehended by the human mind: “In all its aspects and at every moment of history, social life is only possible thanks to a vast symbolism” (233). Religion is therefore a symbolic representation of society. For example, human tribes are often divided into a number of clans whose membership is based on a complex mix of affinal and genetic relationships. Each clan is represented by a totem (usually an animal or a plant) that identifies clan membership, and associated with each totem are a variety of sacred objects and practices that guide the behavior of clan members. Durkheim felt that the symbolic badge of group membership and the aura of sacredness surrounding prescribed behaviors were required for clans to exist as functioning groups. He also felt that periodic gatherings were required to maintain the integrity of groups. The religious rituals and other festivities held during these gatherings were so emotionally intense that they gave force to group identity when its members were dispersed.

Some of Durkheim’s specific proposals still sound plausible today. For example, Deacon (1998) has recently argued that symbolic thought sets humans apart from all other animals and evolved to enable enforced social contracts such as marriage. If he is correct, it will be an impressive confirmation of Durkheim’s claim that human social life is only possible thanks to a vast symbolism. However, some of Durkheim’s other proposals sound antiquated today; this is hardly surprising, since much has happened in the social sciences since 1912! For our purposes we need to distinguish Durkheim’s general thesis that religion is a group-level adaptation from his many specific proposals about how religion performs its various functions. Was Durkheim right about the central thesis but wrong about some of the details, or was he wrong about the central thesis?

THE NEXT GENERATION

Stark and other rational choice theorists discuss Durkheim in a number of contexts. Stark thinks that Durkheim defined religion too broadly (it should be restricted to belief in supernatural agents) but credits him for correctly distinguishing between religion and magic. In general, however, Stark regards Durkheim’s work in particular and functionalism in general as a paradigm that was rejected long ago and that does not need revisiting, citing the great British anthropologist E. E. Evans-Pritchard (1956, 313), who wrote: “It was Durkheim, not the savage, who made society into a god.”

Unlike Durkheim, Evans-Pritchard lived among the people he studied. Not only are his ethnographies of the Nuer and other African tribes still regarded as classics, but he also wrote a general book on theories of primitive religion (Evans-Pritchard 1965), which makes him a good exemplar of the generation of anthropologists that followed Durkheim.

Evans-Pritchard (1965, 56–64) provides a concise and accurate summary of Durkheim’s theory of religion that culminates in the following assessment:

Durkheim’s thesis is more than just neat; it is brilliant and imaginative, almost poetical; and he had an insight into a psychological fundamental of religion: the elimination of the self, the denial of individuality, its having no meaning, or even existence, save as part of something greater, and other, than the self. But I am afraid that we must once more say that it is a just-so story. (64)

Evans-Pritchard then weighed in on the details of Durkheim’s thesis. As a hardened field anthropologist, he was more interested in the empirical details than in the logic and theory. He did not see a rigid dichotomy between the sacred and profane. When Zande shrines were not in ritual use they served as convenient props for spears. Among the Australian aboriginals whom Durkheim analyzed, it was the co-residential groups and tribes, not the clans identified by separate totems, that functioned as corporate units. Furthermore, Australian totemism provided a poor foundation for a general theory of religion. One can almost hear Evans-Pritchard heaving a sigh of exasperation as he ends his litany with the following statement: “if only Tylor, Marett, Durkheim, and all the rest of them could have spent a few weeks among the peoples about whom they so freely wrote” (67).

Although some of Durkheim’s specific proposals were dismantled by Evans-Pritchard and others of his generation, it would be wrong to conclude that the general thesis of functionalism was similarly dismantled. The passage quoted above singles out the elimination of the self, save as part of something greater, as a psychological fundamental of religion. Evans-Pritchard’s own books are peppered with references to groups as “corporate units.” He might have disagreed with Durkheim on the status of clans as corporate units, but not on the basic existence of groups as corporate units or the role of religion in structuring such groups. Indeed, he is perhaps best known for his concept of segmentation: the organization of leaderless tribes into a nested hierarchy of groups that can become functionally organized at any level, depending on the scale of the environmental challenge (usually warfare).

Evans-Pritchard’s (1956) analysis of Nuer religion is fully consistent with the general thesis of functionalism and the biological concept of human groups that we arrived at in [chapter 1](). In fact, one of his most arresting observations is that Nuer religion is similar to the Judaism of the Old Testament—not because of any historical connection but because both were derived from herding cultures whose lives were dominated by their livestock and their own social affairs. If true, this would be an example of convergent cultural evolution that would be difficult to explain without invoking the concepts of adaptation and natural selection.

[Table 2.3]() lists a number of passages from Evans-Pritchard (1956) that interpret Nuer religion as integral to the functional organization of Nuer society. I hope I will be forgiven for overkill, but it is important to establish that when someone as authoritative as Evans-Pritchard criticized Durkheim, he was not rejecting the interpretation of human groups as adaptive units, the role of religion in structuring society, or even the importance of ritual and symbolism provided by religion. What is true for Evans-Pritchard is also true for the entire generation of anthropologists who followed Durkheim and who account for most of the empirical knowledge of so-called primitive people in something close to their pristine state. To choose another example, Victor Turner (\[1969\] 1995) analyzed religious ritual in terms of two key concepts: communitas and structure. Structure is the system of roles related to age, sex, and status that people in a community occupy. Communitas is a conception of the community as an egalitarian unit in which all members, from highest to lowest, have a moral claim. The purpose of structure is to implement the spirit of communitas. As far as social norms are concerned, prescribed roles are intended to serve the interests of the community and should not be exploited for personal gain.

An incumbent of high status is peculiarly tempted to use the authority vested in him by society to satisfy these private and privative wishes. But he should regard his privileges as gifts of the whole community, which in the final issue has an overright over all his actions. Structure and the high offices provided by structure are thus seen as instrumentalities of the commonweal, not as means of personal aggrandizement. (Turner \[1965\] 1995, 104)

Of course individuals often do abuse the power invested in them by their communities. As we saw in [chapter 1](), human groups achieve their functional organization not entirely by self-restraint (although this can be an important factor) but by mutual vigilance and social control. According to Turner, ritual is one important mechanism that keeps structure and communitas bound to each other. A common feature of ritual in both traditional and modern societies involves the stripping away of status, especially during the transition from one social role to another. One memorable example from Gabon involves the election of a new king, who is chosen secretly by the village elders and is kept ignorant of his fate until the following event occurs:

It happened that Njogoni, a good friend of my own, was elected. The choice fell on him, in part because he came of a good family, but chiefly because he was a favourite of the people and could get the most votes. I do not think that Njogoni had the slightest suspicion of his elevation. As he was walking on the shore on the morning of the seventh day \[after the death of the former king\] he was suddenly set upon by the entire populace, who proceeded to a ceremony which is preliminary to the crowning and must deter any but the most ambitious man from aspiring to the crown. They surrounded him in a dense crowd, and then began to heap upon him every manner of abuse that the worst of mobs could imagine. Some spat in his face; some beat him with their fists; some kicked him; others threw disgusting objects at him; while those unlucky ones who stood on the outside, and could reach the poor fellow only with their voices, assiduously cursed him, his father, his mother, his sisters and brothers, and all his ancestors to the remotest generation. A stranger would not have given a cent for the life of him who was presently to be crowned.

Amid all the noise and struggle, I caught the words which explained all this to me; for every few minutes some fellow, administering a specially severe blow or kick, would shout out, “You are not our king yet; for a little while we will do what we please with you. By-and-by we will have to do your will.”

Njogoni bore himself like a man and prospective King. He kept his temper, and took all the abuse with a smiling face. When it had lasted about half an hour they took him to the house of the old king. Here he was seated, and became again for a little while the victim of his people’s curses.

Then all became silent; and the elders of the people rose and said, solemnly (the people repeating after them), “now we choose you for our king; we engage to listen to you and to obey you.” He was then dressed in a red gown, and received the greatest marks of respect from all who had just now abused him. (from Du Chaillu 1868; quoted in Turner \[1965\] 1995, 171)

This passage wonderfully illustrates the spirit of egalitarianism that pervades human communities long after they have become structurally hierarchical. Turner does not comment or provide evidence for the effectiveness of such humbling rituals in curtailing selfish behavior, which should be an important objective for future research. However, the meaning and intention of such rituals, as interpreted by Turner, is highly consistent with the conception of human groups unified by moral systems that we arrived at in [chapter 1]().

Until recently, the only way to learn about the customs of so-called primitive people was through the writing of Western anthropologists. Increasingly, however, members of these cultures are speaking for themselves. An interesting example is Malidoma Patrice Somé, a member of the West African Dagara culture, who has attempted to interpret the nature of ritual for an American audience (Somé 1997). According to Some, rituals and social responsibilities are “inseparable” (11). [Table 2.4]() lists representative passages that gratifyingly support the central thesis of Durkheim, Evans-Pritchard, Turner, and many other anthropologists of their generations. The connection between religion and functionally organized society is not just a figment of Durkheim’s or of the Western imagination.

FUNCTIONALISM TODAY

So far I have shown that functionalism was not rejected by the anthropologists who followed Durkheim, including those who lived among the people they studied. When and why, then, was functionalism rejected? There is no single answer to this question, since the social sciences are a vast archipelago of disciplines that only partially communicate with each other. The prevailing wisdom about functionalism varies among disciplines, even for the study of religion (see Allen et al. 1998 for a recently published volume celebrating Durkheim’s *Elementary Forms of Religious Life,* in contrast to the disparaging views of most rational choice theorists). This kind of fragmentation within the social sciences is regrettable, especially for those, such as myself, who are attempting to forge an even larger synthesis between the social sciences and biology.

The most comprehensive modern assessment of functionalism can be obtained from philosophers, who are better than most practicing scientists at synthesizing across disciplines. A useful selection of philosophical articles on functionalism and the closely related subject of holism has been compiled by Martin and McIntyre (1994). These articles raise a number of issues that need to be examined from a modern evolutionary perspective. The following discussion will help to revive functionalism throughout the social sciences and will pave the way to our study of religion.

**Holism**

The idea that the whole is somehow more than the sum of its parts is one of the most common and also one of the most vaguely articulated themes associated with functionalism. Durkheim was eager to create a science of sociology and was not prone to mysticism. He was happy to concede that the social organism could exist only within individual minds, but he nevertheless insisted that a sociological level of explanation existed that could not be reduced to individual behavior. The alternative to Durkheim’s view became known as methodological individualism, described by Watkins (\[1957\] 1994, 442) as follows:

According to this principle, the ultimate constituents of the social world are individual people who act more or less appropriately in the light of their dispositions and understanding of their situation. Every complex social situation, institution, or event is the result of a particular configuration of individuals, their dispositions, situations, beliefs, and physical resources and environment. There may be unfinished or halfway explanations of large-scale phenomena (say, inflation) in terms of other large-scale phenomena (say, full employment); but we shall not have arrived at rock-bottom explanations of such large-scale phenomena until we have deduced an account of them from statements about the dispositions, belief, resources and interrelations of individuals. . . . And just as mechanism is contrasted with the organicist idea of physical fields, so methodological individualism is contrasted with sociological holism or organicism.

Methodological individualism swept through the social sciences and eclipsed “organicism” at about the same time that the theory of individual selection swept through evolutionary biology, eclipsing multilevel selection theory. Nevertheless, these two forms of individualism are very different from each other, as I will show. In addition, it might surprise some readers to learn that the extreme reductionism expressed by Watkins has not withstood critical scrutiny, enabling philosopher Elliott Sober (1999) to state: “If there is now a received view among philosophers of mind and philosophers of biology about reductionism, it is that reductionism is mistaken.”

The most relevant form of holism for our purposes is based on the concept of adaptation. Consider all the artificial selection experiments that have been conducted on fruit flies (*Drosophila*): they have been given short wings, long wings, no wings, many bristles, few bristles—the list goes on and on. The question “Why do these particular fruit flies have this particular phenotype?” has two answers. First, every phenotype is caused mechanistically by genes that interact with each other and their environment during development. Second, the phenotype exists because of a history of selection for that phenotype, coupled with heritable variation. These two explanations are usually labeled “proximate” and “ultimate” respectively, and there is a sense in which the latter is more fundamental than the former. As one classic example, Cohan (1984) divided a single population of fruit flies into a number of isolated smaller populations. He then selected the same trait (wing vein length) in each isolated population, examining the response to selection and the underlying genetic mechanisms in each case. It turned out that the same phenotypic trait of long wing veins evolved by different genetic mechanisms. A single ultimate-level explanation sufficed for all the populations, but different proximate-level explanations were required. More generally, the natural world is full of species that have evolved similar solutions to life’s problems (e.g., hard exteriors as protection from predators), even though they are composed of different genes and physical materials (e.g., chitin for beetles, cellulose for plant seeds, and calcium carbonate for snails).

In short, heritable variation and selection provide a solid foundation for the holistic claim that the parts permit the properties of the whole but do not cause the properties of the whole.[2]() A lump of clay permits but does not cause the form provided by the sculptor. To the extent that the physical make-up of organisms provides heritable variation, it becomes a malleable clay that can be sculpted by selection. Evolutionary biologists rely upon this kind of holism all the time. They confidently predict that desert animals should be sandy colored, a bird’s wing should be aerodynamically efficient, and small fish should be timid in the presence of predators without any reference whatsoever to the genes or physical material that make up these organisms. Proximate explanation (“the sandy color in this species is caused by chromatin granules, which are coded by genes on the fourth chromosome”) complements ultimate explanation (“the sandy color is caused by a history of selection favoring cryptic coloration”) but never substitutes for it.

The distinction between proximate and ultimate explanation, which lies at the heart of evolutionary analysis and which will figure importantly in our study of religion, stands in contrast to Watkins’s use of the word “ultimate” in the passage quoted above. For Watkins, the whole can only be truly understood in terms of the interactions among its parts, which are its “ultimate” constituents. This might be true for objects that have not been molded by natural selection. If you are handed a mineral and asked to explain its properties, what else can you do but look at its parts and their interactions? However, the molding action of natural selection endows the word “ultimate” with a new meaning that gives the whole priority over its clay-like parts. That is why the theory of individual selection, which relies heavily on the concept of adaptation, is different from methodological individualism, which relies heavily on the concept of mechanistic reductionism (Wilson 1988).

So far I have used individual organisms as the wholes in my discussion of holism. I have shown that Watkins’s negative comments about “organicism” are mistaken when applied to creatures such as an insect, a fish, or a person. Multilevel selection theory allows us to frame-shift the entire discussion upward, in which the wholes are social groups and the parts are their individual members. To the degree that groups are units of selection, they possess properties that are permitted but not caused by their individual members. This is exactly what Durkheim and other functionalists were reaching for, which the tradition of methodological individualism erroneously seemed to deny. A position in the social sciences that in the past appeared wooly-minded and mystical can be placed on a rock-solid evolutionary foundation.

**Complexity**

Adaptationism is the most relevant form of holism/functionalism for the purposes of this book. Another form of holism/functionalism, based on complex interactions, needs to be distinguished and set aside even though it is interesting and important in its own right.[3]() Consider the famous examples of water and salt, whose properties are difficult to predict from their parts (hydrogen and oxygen in the case of water and sodium and chloride in the case of salt). This concept of holism is based on complex interactions rather than functional organization. Salt and water have no purpose; their properties simply reside mostly in the interactions among their parts rather than in the properties of the parts as isolated units. In the same way, functionalism in the social sciences often seems to stress complexity and interconnectedness rather than functional organization per se (e.g., Malinowski 1944, 158–59). One example is a book called *Dynamic Functionalism* (Faia 1986), which stresses complex feedback processes and multiple stable equilibria (“absorbing Markov chains”). Along with Kincaid (in Martin and McIntyre 1994, 417), I think that this rendering of functionalism “casts the net too widely.” I take it as a given that human cultures and social interactions are tremendously complex and interconnected, like water and salt only more so. Unfortunately, dysfunction can be as complex and locally stable as function, so the term “functionalism” should be avoided for concepts of holism based on complexity and restricted to the direct or indirect products of natural selection.

**Functionalism and multilevel selection**

Virtually everyone who has written on functionalism agrees that it is a legitimate form of explanation for individual-level adaptations that evolved by natural selection. There is nothing wrong with saying that the heart functions to circulate blood, that the turtle’s shell functions to protect it from predators, etc., as long as these traits really did evolve by natural selection for the reasons that are ascribed to them. The problem with functionalism begins when we attempt to explain the properties of groups in general and especially human groups, for which the influence of natural selection is not so obvious. The rejection of group selection by evolutionary biologists and hostility toward evolutionary approaches to human behavior by many social scientists combined over the years to restrict functional explanation to the individual properties of nonhuman species.

I fully agree that functional explanations must be judged by the same criteria in evolutionary biology and in the social sciences. What has changed is the likelihood that the criteria are satisfied for the properties of groups in general and human groups in particular. Since philosophers and social scientists already acknowledge the legitimacy of functionalism at the individual level in nonhuman species when warranted by natural selection, the developments in evolutionary biology that I outlined in [chapter 1]() automatically set the stage for the return of group-level functionalism in the social sciences.

**Just-so stories**

A common criticism of adaptationist hypotheses in biology and functionalist hypotheses in the social sciences is that they are difficult to test. The derogatory term “just-so story,” an allusion to the fanciful tales of Rudyard Kipling, was used by Evans-Pritchard against Durkheim (see the passage quoted above) long before Gould and Lewontin (1979) used it against what they regarded as adaptationist excesses in biology.

Of course, no one would dream of saying outright “this hypothesis is false because it is difficult to test.” Science is a labor-intensive process, and some of the most important nuts are also the most difficult to crack. The “just-so story” criticism of functionalism implicitly assumes that nonfunctionalist hypotheses are easier to test and can substitute for functionalist hypotheses. Neither of these assumptions is likely to be true. I have already discussed the fact that proximate and ultimate explanations do not substitute for each other. In addition, adaptationism enjoys its status in evolutionary biology in part because it is *simpler* to employ than nonfunctionalist approaches. Often only a little knowledge suffices to make an initial prediction about the properties of organisms that enhance fitness in their environments (e.g., fish in streams with predators should be more timid than fish in streams without predators). In contrast, predictions based on phylogeny, genetics, development, and physiology require far more effort. As with predictions, so also with testing. Why should the hypothesis that fish are timid in the presence of predators be more difficult to test than, say, the hypothesis that fish development constrains heritable variation? Mature research programs in biology pay equal attention to ultimate and proximate explanation, but they often begin with an adaptationist hypothesis that provides the best and most economical “first guess” about the properties of the organism (see Hempel 1959, reprinted in Martin and McIntyre 1994, 371, for a similar view of functionalism in the social sciences). Indeed, discrepancies between adaptationist predictions and the properties of real organisms often lead to the discovery of nonadaptive factors that would have been missed otherwise. If we discover that fish are not timid in the presence of predators, despite the fact that it would increase their fitness, we might be tempted to look for factors that constrain adaptation and natural selection.

I do not mean to underestimate the challenge of testing functionalist hypotheses in evolutionary biology or in the social sciences. However, it is equally excessive to regard functionalism in general as a giant compendium of just-so stories that are somehow immune to scientific inquiry. The fact is that with enough hard work, evolutionary biologists are able to demonstrate the presence or absence of adaptations beyond all reasonable doubt. The quality of the science and the reliability of its conclusions are as good as for any other field of inquiry.

Because I intend to use standard evolutionary methods to study religion, it will help to show how they are successfully used to study adaptations in nonhuman species. When they aren’t in pet stores and household aquaria, guppies (*Peocilia reticulata*) live in tropical streams that typically include dangerous fish predators in their downstream but not in their upstream portions. Since predators are a major source of mortality for guppies, we can predict that downstream and upstream populations become locally adapted to the presence and absence of predators, respectively. This hypothesis can be tested with at least three different sources of evidence, most usefully in combination with each other (reviewed by Endler 1986, 1995).

The first source of evidence is based on the argument from design. An object designed for a given purpose must have certain properties to achieve its purpose, which are unlikely to have arisen by chance. The more numerous, complex, and interlocking the design features, the more compelling the evidence for their designed nature. William Paley (1805) popularized the argument from design as evidence for God, but in fact it only provides evidence for a designing agent—the hand of God, a human engineer, alien visitors from another planet, or the process of natural selection. Thus, if we are studying organisms and if we exclude special creation and alien designers from other planets from consideration, we are left with design as a source of evidence of evolutionary adaptation. In the case of guppies, predator avoidance involves a suite of morphological, behavioral, and life history traits that would be difficult to explain in other ways. Endler (1995) provides a list of forty-seven traits that have been examined so far. One of these is age at first reproduction. In a downstream environment where every day might be a guppy’s last, it is adaptive to have babies as soon as possible. In an upstream environment where the predators are so ineffective that only small guppies are in danger, it is adaptive to grow to a large size before starting to have babies. Upstream guppies are therefore predicted to have a later age of first reproduction than downstream guppies. When predictions such as this one are confirmed for a large suite of traits, it provides compelling evidence for adaptation and natural selection.

The argument from design can be based on the properties of a single organism or structure (e.g., the eye, or Paley’s example of a watch, which is so elaborately constructed for a purpose that it couldn’t exist by chance). The second source of evidence expands the view to include a comparison of organisms that occupy different environments. If natural selection adapts organisms to their environment, then the organisms should change as the environment changes (in more technical language, there should be a phenotype-environment correlation). Not only should downstream guppies have a suite of traits adapting them to the presence of predators, but upstream guppies should have another suite of traits adapting them to the absence of predators. Moreover, the geographical range of guppies includes dozens of river systems that have been separated from each other for millions of years. The river systems differ in their particular predator species, geochemistry, and other features, but all have the same downstream-upstream gradient of predator risk, providing a natural replicated experiment. In some cases the transition between upstream and downstream is amazingly abrupt, as when a waterfall acts as a barrier for the predator species but not for the guppies. In these cases, guppies that live only a few meters apart from each other (on each side of the waterfall) should differ in their phenotypic traits. If the upstream-downstream differences are found again and again in separate river systems, the adaptationist hypothesis receives powerful support. Subtle differences between river systems can also provide additional evidence. For example, in some streams the major predator is a crustacean rather than a fish. Crustaceans have a different visual system than vertebrates and are blind to the color orange, which gives their guppy prey a private wavelength for displaying to each other while remaining cryptic to their predators. It turns out that male guppies in the presence of fish predators are cryptic to the vertebrate eye, while male guppies in the presence of crustacean predators are ablaze with orange spots.

The third source of evidence involves tracking the evolutionary process. The ultimate proof of an adaptation is to actually watch it evolve. Natural selection was once assumed to be such a slow process that only the products, and not the process, could be directly observed. This view has been shattered by dozens of empirical studies, as eloquently described by Weiner (1994) in his Pulitzer prize-winning book *The beak of the finch.* In the case of guppies, downstream fish transplanted to upstream tributaries have evolved the upstream suite of traits within ten generations. To determine that predators were the causative agent, the same experiment was performed in the laboratory with identical physical environments that differed only in the presence and absence of predators. Other selection experiments altered the size and color of the gravel that forms the physical background against which guppies are seen by their predators. Since avoiding predators requires matching one’s background, changing the spots in the environment actually changed the spots on the guppies in only a few generations (Endler 1986). Could there be a more convincing demonstration of organisms as a reflection of their environment?

When all three sources of evidence are taken together, any reasonable person must conclude that guppies are locally adapted to the presence and absence of predators in their environments. Even creationists have accepted this conclusion for evolutionary research on microevolution, which in part has caused them to shift their definition of “natural kind” to a higher taxonomic scale. This does not mean that guppies are perfectly adapted in every way or that constraints on the process of natural selection can be ignored. As one example, Houde and Hankes (1997) studied two populations in which females preferred orange-colored spots in males, but in only one of these populations had the males responded to sexual selection by evolving orange spots. More work is required to determine the factors that seem to have constrained natural selection in this case.

It is gratifying that empirical research can achieve the middle ground between functionalism and its alternatives that so often is lost in polemical debates. In addition, evolutionary methods for studying adaptations in nonhuman species can be applied to the study of religion, as I will attempt to show in subsequent chapters. While certain kinds of research on humans are off-limits for obvious and well-justified ethical reasons, other kinds of research can be performed more easily on humans than on other species. In addition, solid progress can be made on the basis of descriptive information and “natural experiments” that exist in abundance for religions around the world and throughout history. Rather than complaining about the difficulty of testing functionalist hypotheses, we need to roll up our sleeves and start using our proven tools on the material at hand.

**Intentional behavior**

Human behavior is often goal oriented, and the implements people employ to achieve goals are correspondingly functional. If I lock myself out of my house and fetch a ladder to enter the upstairs window, the function of the ladder is to enable me to reach the window. The function of the lock and key is to enable me to gain access to my house while keeping others out, even if I occasionally lock myself out as well. Human life is awash with this kind of functionality, which exists at the level of groups in addition to individuals. A business corporation might be intricately designed by its executives to maximize profits. The very word corporation, which is derived from the Latin word for “body,” implies functional organization above the level of the individual.

In an influential analysis of modes of scientific explanation, Elster (1983) properly distinguishes causal (proximate) explanation from functional (ultimate) explanation. However, he then tries to make another distinction between functional explanation and intentional explanation. My efforts to discuss functionalism with social scientists frequently run aground on this distinction, which therefore requires our attention.

Let’s begin with biology, which Elster agrees provides the foundation for functionalism. Consider a species of zooplankton with a peculiar spike on its head. Suppose we conduct sufficient research to establish that the spike is an antipredator adaptation. Elster presumably would agree that the function of the spike is to protect the individual from predators. Now consider another species of zooplankton that is developmentally flexible. No spike develops when predators are absent but the presence of predators is sensed chemically and triggers the development of the spike. Suppose we conduct sufficient research to establish that the developmental mechanism is also an adaptation. In fact, the second species is historically derived from the first species. Its developmental flexibility allows it to “have its cake and eat it too,” by dispensing with the spike when it is not needed.

Many examples of adaptive flexibility (also called “phenotypic plasticity”) have accumulated in the biological literature. Mentality is not required; bacteria and plants can be adaptively flexible. It is easy to show theoretically that flexibility is favored in some kinds of environments but not others (Wilson and Yoshimura 1994). Some species (including humans) might even consist of a mix of developmentally flexible and inflexible genotypes (Wilson et al. 1994). I want to claim that adaptive flexibility does not change the functional interpretation of phenotypes. The function of the spike in both zooplankton species is to protect the individual from predators. The species differ in the proximate mechanisms that evolved to produce the spike, but that difference does not alter the functional interpretation of the spike. Similarly, guppies cannot change their spots as individuals and therefore require the passage of generations to match their background. Flounders, octopi, and many other species can change their color as individuals and can match their background in a few moments. In both cases the function of matching one’s background is to avoid predators.

My claim should be uncontroversial, but what is human intentionality but an elaborate mechanism of environmental assessment, built by natural selection, that culminates on balance in adaptive phenotypes? Allman’s (1999) panoramic review of brain evolution illustrates my point by starting with the brain-like functions of bacteria:

Some of the most basic features of brains can be found in bacteria because even the simplest motile organisms must solve the problem of locating resources and avoiding toxins in a variable environment. Strictly speaking, these unicellular organisms do not have nervous systems, but nevertheless they exhibit remarkably complex behavior: They sense their environment through a large number of receptors and store this elaborate sensory input in the form of brief memory traces. Moreover, they integrate the inputs from these multiple memory sensory channels to produce adaptive movements. The revolution in our understanding of genetic mechanisms has made it possible to determine how these brainlike processes work at a molecular level in bacteria. (Allman 1999, 3)

Real brains have the same function of transforming environmental information into adaptive phenotypes. Human brains may be unique in their ability to process symbolic information (as argued by Deacon 1998), but that does not alter their basic function or the functionality of the activities that are motivated by human thought. If a person knowingly fashions a spear to ward off predators, why on earth should we avoid the conclusion that the function of the spear is to ward off predators, just because intentional thought was involved?

Elster’s distinction between functional and intentional explanation seems so strange that the reader may wonder if I am misrepresenting his position. Therefore, consider his own example of how to explain the profit-maximizing behavior of business firms (Elster 1983, 57–58). Evidently, the Chicago school of economists determined that firms were maximizing their profits but that the members of the firms were largely unaware of the specific practices responsible for their success. This finding led the economists to speculate that the successful practices had evolved by a process of selection; firms vary in ways unknown to their members, and the best outcompete the worst. Another possibility is that members of firms recognize and imitate success, even if they don’t understand how the specific practices that they imitate lead to success. In this case, the best practices spread by imitation rather than by the actual survival and reproduction of firms. According to Elster, only the raw evolutionary process of differential survival and reproduction qualifies as a functional explanation. Even spread by imitation qualifies as an intentional explanation. This is like saying that a spear cannot be explained by its function if the spear-maker knows what he is making, or even if he blindly imitates another person who owns a spear and brings home more game.

The evolutionary distinction between ultimate and proximate explanation can help us avoid this nonsensical conclusion while retaining the distinction that I suspect Elster is trying to make. The first and foremost question we must ask is whether an object of study counts as functional: are its properties designed to accomplish a given effect? A spear is a spear is a spear, regardless of whether it is made by intentional thought, blind imitation, or an even blinder process of differential survival and reproduction. The next question is to determine the designing agent or process. Is it the hand of God, a selection process, or an organism that itself is a product of a selection process? It is remarkable how well the first question can be answered without knowledge about the answer to the second question. William Harvey discovered the function of the heart and circulatory system centuries before Darwin. He was wrong about the designing agent but right about the function of the heart. The Chicago school of economists discovered the profit-maximizing behavior of firms without needing to settle the issue of imitation vs. takeover. This is one reason to regard intentional thought as one of several possible proximate mechanisms that create function rather than as an alternative to functional explanation.

If the designing agent is an organism, a new set of questions comes to the fore. In the case of humans, we might especially want to know if function can be attributed to the mental processes that Elster classifies as intentional. Thus, Elster’s distinction remains important but can be appreciated while avoiding the bizarre consequences of treating intentional and functional explanations as fundamentally different from each other.

**Latent and manifest functions**

Despite my disagreement with Elster, there is a sense in which he correctly interprets the functionalist debate. Functionalists were not simply pointing out the functions of intentional behaviors that were already manifestly obvious. They were claiming latent functions for practices and institutions at a grand scale that were not products of conscious intentional thought. Stated in evolutionary terms, Elster thinks that conscious intentional thought is the only proximate mechanism that makes human life functional. There are no latent functions beyond our awareness, only those of which we are already conscious. If this position is correct, then functionalism as an intellectual tradition would be dead.

However, this position is completely untenable, based on the evolutionary principles outlined in [chapter 1](). Functionality in human life can be attributed to at least three proximate mechanisms beyond the conscious intentional mechanisms emphasized by Elster: (1) psychological processes at the individual level that lie beneath conscious awareness; (2) group-level processes that individuals partake in without conscious knowledge of their roles; and (3) ongoing processes of cultural evolution.

With respect to individual psychology, Elster evidently regards all animal mentality and unconscious human mentality as simple forms of associative learning, which makes the possibility of unconscious intentions inconceivable to him:

It follows from this argument that the notion of unconscious intentions is no more coherent than that of a squared circle. It does not follow, however, that it is impossible to make sense of the notion of the unconscious, if we conceive of it strictly as a mechanism for climbing along a pleasure-gradient. It would be absurd to impute to the unconscious the capacity for waiting, for making sacrifices, for acting according to rules, etc., for these modes of behaviour all presuppose consciousness. (Elster 1983, 71–72)

Unfortunately for Elster, the trend in cognitive, evolutionary, and social psychology has been steadily away from this view toward ever more sophisticated, special purpose, unconscious information processing systems in both humans and other animals—so much that the concept of consciousness has become precarious and speculative (Allman 1999; Damasio 1994; Deacon 1998; Rolls 1998). Individual behavior is replete with latent functions, before we even proceed to the level of groups.

With respect to group psychology, fuzzy concepts of “social organisms” and “group minds” were easy prey for the seemingly hard-headed individualism and reductionism of the last few decades. However, I have already shown how the circuitry that we associate with “mind” can exist among a network of individuals as easily as among a network of neurons when groups are the units of selection. Examples are already known for the social insects, and finding comparable examples for humans might be primarily a matter of deciding that they are possible before we can see them clearly.[4]() In any case, the more individuals act as participants in a group mental process, the less likely they are to be consciously aware of the process.

With respect to ongoing evolutionary processes, I have already shown in [chapter 1]() that what we loosely define as “culture” is in part a Darwin machine that produces phenotypic variation and heritability at the group level. If cultural phenotypic variation has functional consequences, it is hard to avoid the conclusion that at least some properties of present-day cultures owe their existence directly to the winnowing process of natural selection. In addition, it would be naive to expect people always to be aware of this source of function in their lives.

Since cultural adaptation as a direct product of cultural evolution has always been acceptable evidence for functionalism, it may surprise some readers that compelling examples can be found in the social sciences literature. Perhaps the best example is the Nuer, the African pastoralist tribe whose religion was described earlier in this chapter (summarized by Kelly 1985).[5]() Linguistic evidence shows that the Nuer were historically derived from the Dinka, a neighboring tribe that shared the same environment and subsistence economy. Nevertheless, the Nuer and Dinka differed culturally in ways that gave the Nuer both a stronger incentive to raid cattle and the ability to field a larger fighting force in intertribal conflict. As a result, the Nuer were in the process of replacing the Dinka when they were contacted by anthropologists in the 1800s. If the “Nuer conquest” (actually the cumulative result of many independent raids and not an active campaign) had not been halted by the British and Egyptian administration, there would probably be no Dinka tribe for anthropologists to study.

The features of Nuer culture that accounted for their need to expand and their competitive superiority are complex and multifaceted, including brideprice customs that influenced herd management practices and a kinship system that enabled settlements to join together in war even after they had stopped interacting with respect to subsistence. Not all cultural differences between the two tribes are functional; there is plenty of room for what in evolutionary terms would be called byproduct explanations. Nevertheless, decades of anthropological research have established a convincing example of cultural replacement that can be causally attributed to cultural differences in which even the phylogenetic relationship of the two cultures is well understood. This example is generally thought by anthropologists to represent a common process of cultural replacement, even if other examples have not been documented to the same extent. As Darwin said, at all times throughout the world, tribes have supplanted other tribes. In addition, there is not the slightest hint that either the Nuer or the Dinka were aware of their differences or tried to consciously manage their cultures to succeed in inter-tribe competition. The cultural differences simply emerged and were stable enough to persist, with important functional consequences.

Closer to home are the cultural differences among regions of the United States that are derived from differences among the original colonists, and which remain discernible after centuries (Fischer 1989; Nisbett and Cohen 1996; Phillips 2000). It is likely that the outcome of the American Civil War was based as much on the long-term consequences of cultural variation as on environmental differences between the North and South. A third example is Putnam’s (1993) exquisitely documented study of the patterns of cultural variation in Italy—patterns that have remained stable for a millennium, with profound functional consequences in the context of today’s socioeconomic environment. Putnam’s study illustrates the halting and inefficient nature of cultural evolution in addition to some of its basic ingredients. Cultural evolution may be fast in comparison to genetic evolution, but it can still require many human lifetimes. In addition, cultural variation does not always result in cultural evolution. Majority effects, spatial effects, and other factors complicate the concept of fitness for cultural and biological evolution alike, as I discussed in [chapter 1]() (see also Michod 1999a).

In none of these examples is there the slightest hint that people are aware of the functionally important features of their cultures, nor is there any compelling theoretical reason to expect them to. Indeed, Putnam (1993) pessimistically concludes that the deep structure of many contemporary human societies might prevent them from achieving the social goals for which they are intentionally striving. Similarly, Tocqueville (1835) observed that although the Mexican constitution was patterned after the American constitution, Mexico remained very different from the United States. Something mysterious that we don’t understand, which in our ignorance we refer to as “custom” or “culture,” is so important that it accounts for the fate of whole peoples and nations. It is a delusion that everything functional in human affairs is consciously intended. Evolutionary biologists and human social scientists should work together to understand the evolutionary processes that create latent functions in our species.

RATIONAL CHOICE THEORY REVISITED

Our progress so far can be summarized as follows: I began by describing rational choice theory as one of the most vigorous approaches to religion in the social sciences. It seems to reject functionalism in favor of a byproduct theory of religion, based on the general human tendency to seek explanations and employ cost-benefit reasoning. Then I examined the rejected tradition of functionalism, arguing that rumors of its death have been greatly exaggerated. The anthropologists who followed Durkheim did not reject functionalism on the basis of their greater field experience, and the most important objections raised by philosophers and social scientists must be revised on the basis of the evolutionary principles outlined in [chapter 1]().

Now I will show that the byproduct theory of religion is not nearly as robust as it is often taken to be. Before I criticize the rational choice literature, however, I must acknowledge some of its strengths. In may ways, it has been a productive research program and a model of scientific inquiry. It is a great achievement to develop a theory of religion based on the same principles that govern secular behavior. A good theory generates many testable hypotheses. A really good theory passes at least some of the tests. The rational choice theory of religion qualifies as a good theory by both of these criteria.

What, then, is left to criticize? There are a number of ways to bring religion under the umbrella of rational choice theory. One is to explain religion as the economic mind spinning its wheels to get what it can’t have (a byproduct). Another is to explain religion as more genuinely utilitarian, producing resources that can be had but only through the beliefs and social organization provided by religion or a comparable system (an adaptation). Stark’s formal theory of religion is strongly committed to the first approach, as his own list of propositions attests. However, the larger rational choice literature on religion, including some of Stark’s own work, is not so committed and slips easily between these two forms of explanation.

Just as evolutionary theory can explain religion in many different ways, which I classified in [table 1.1](), many economic theories of religion exist that must be distinguished from each other. The individual who maximizes his own self-interest lies at the core of economic theory, which bears a superficial resemblance to individual selection theory in evolution. However, economics also offers a theory of the firm, in which groups are envisioned as the adaptive units. Mother Teresa poses no problem for economic theory because she employs cost-benefit reasoning to maximize her own peculiar utility of helping others (Kwilecki and Wilson 1998). If I sacrifice my time and hard-earned money praying to imaginary gods for resources that are not forthcoming, I fall within economic theory because I am employing cost-benefit reasoning, based on my beliefs (Stark 1999).

Clearly, economic theory shares with evolutionary theory the capacity to explain vastly different concepts of religion—but that is a weakness as much as a strength. If a theory can’t distinguish among such different concepts and pit them against each other with empirical tests, what good is it? To make progress we must take a stand on a specific concept. I am taking a stand on the concept of religious groups as adaptive units, which allows me to aim a highly specific criticism at the rational choice literature: It *seems* to reject the concept I am evaluating, when in fact it does nothing of the sort. The situation is strikingly similar to the rejection of group selection in evolutionary biology in favor of theories that in fact included group selection within their own structure.

This problem pervades the rational choice literature but can be illustrated with a single example. In an article entitled “Voodoo Economics? Reviewing the Rational Choice Approach to Religion,” Iannaccone (1995) compares the rational choice approach with alternative approaches as follows:

The basic issue, after all, is whether people attend to costs and benefits and act so as to maximize their net benefits. The principal alternative is unreflective action based on habit, norms, emotion, neurosis, socialization, cultural constraints, or the like—action that is largely unresponsive to changes in perceived costs, benefits, or probabilities of success. (81–82)

For decades, scholars have scrutinized religion from every angle except that of rational choice. Explanations of religious phenomena have stressed socialization, indoctrination, neurosis, cognitive dissonance, tradition, deviance, deprivation, functionalism, the role of emotions, the impact of culture and more. But rarely has anyone viewed religion as the product of cost-benefit decisions, and formal models of the religious behavior (rational or otherwise) scarcely exist. (86)

The appearance of functionalism so far down the list of alternatives shows how low its fortunes have sunk. In another passage Iannaccone includes “boundary maintenance” (82) as a specific function of religion that can be discarded along with everything else in this giant house-cleaning of the social sciences. Against this background, consider Iannaccone’s own work. In two influential articles, he shows how seemingly inefficient and bizarre features of religion such as distinctive dress, dietary restrictions, and costly sacrifice can be adaptive (he uses the word “rational”) by turning the religion into an exclusive club that excludes free-riders (Iannaccone 1992, 1994). Those who seek to selfishly exploit the church will be deterred by the costs and lost opportunities of membership. Those who do become members will work hard for the common good because their other options have been so circumscribed by their religion. They will benefit from their efforts because free-riders have been weeded out of the group. Iannaccone’s theory accounts for the paradoxical fact, first noted by Kelly (1972), that churches are strong and vigorous in direct proportion to their strictness.

Iannaccone’s theory is elegant, and I will discuss it in more detail in [chapter 5](). But is it a rational choice theory of religion that stands in contrast to an earlier, functionalist theory? For Iannaccone, the answer is obviously “yes” because cost-benefit reasoning is required for the free-riders and club members to respond to the religion as predicted by the theory. Fair enough. But how did the religion acquire its structure that adaptively constrains the choices of utility-maximizers in just the right way? We must explain the structure of the religion in addition to the behavior of individuals once the structure is in place. Were the bizarre customs consciously invented by rational actors attempting to maximize their utilities? If so, why did they have the utility of maximizing the common good of their church? Must we really attribute all adaptive features of a religion to a psychological process of cost-benefit reasoning? Isn’t a process of blind variation and selective retention possible? After all, thousands of religions are born and die without notice because they never attract more than a few members (Stark and Bainbridge 1985). Perhaps the adaptive features of the few that survive are like random mutations rather than the product of rational choice.

Were it not for the vagaries of history and the shifting fashions of intellectual thought, Iannaccone’s theory would qualify as a fine example of functionalism. Durkheim never denied cost-benefit religious reasoning. Recall the passage quoted earlier, which begins: “That man has an interest in knowing the world around him and that, consequently, his reflection was quickly applied to it, everyone will readily accept.” He went further to say that religious belief is abandoned when it fails to have secular utility. It was Durkheim’s insistence on secular utility that led him to reject the byproduct theories of his day and to explain religion as fundamentally functional for its members. The challenge for Durkheim was to interpret the many features of religion that appear to lack function as having latent functions. Iannaccone could accurately be described as a modern Durkheim who has revealed the latent functions of religion, including the all-important function of boundary marking, that serve to increase the collective utility of its members. Instead, he regards himself as a rational choice theorist and lumps boundary marking in particular and functionalism in general along with a meaningless jumble of other concepts as outside rational choice theory. The fact that Iannaccone’s theory explains how religion provides real benefits for its members (an adaptation) rather than the illusion of getting what they can’t have (a byproduct) is not perceived as a problem. Who needs byproduct theories or functionalism when economics offers the theory of the firm?

THE FUTURE OF FUNCTIONALISM

I began this book by saying that many subjects have a long, hard road to travel before they can advance by way of the textbook portrayal of the scientific method. Functionalism is such a subject. Over a century of effort hasn’t even come close to resolving some of the most fundamental questions that can be asked about human behavior and social organization. The worst that can be said about functionalism is that it failed to fulfill itself as a research program during its heyday. Functionalism wasn’t falsified; it merely went out of fashion.

Two major developments in intellectual thought may allow functionalism to succeed as a research program in the future, despite its past failures. The first is progress in evolutionary biology, which provides the foundation for functional explanations of all kinds. When Evans-Pritchard (1965) reviewed theories of primitive religion, he described Durkheim’s theory as “sociological” in contrast to a different and rejected class of “evolutionary” theories. What Evans-Pritchard meant by evolution would be unrecognizable today. Advances include not only multilevel selection theory (a very recent development) but also the integration of ecology, evolution, and behavior, the mature empirical study of adaptations, and modern evolutionary approaches to human behavior. If evolution is the foundation of functionalism, then there is a new foundation upon which to build.

The second major development is the unification of the human social sciences, which I described earlier as a vast archipelago of disciplines that only partially communicate with each other. My status as an outsider makes it easy for me to island-hop the social sciences, and I am struck by the lack of consistency. To pick an example, anthropologists interested in cultural change, even those who regard themselves as anti-Darwinian, tend to emphasize non-intentional processes while neglecting the possibility of rational choice. Cultures don’t choose their destiny; it simply happens to them through processes of which they are largely unaware. To question this largely unstated assumption, Boehm (1996) searched the ethnographic literature for case studies of how cultures respond to emergency events, such as warfare or natural disasters. In each case, the people responded by meeting as a group to discuss their options in a highly practical and rational fashion. Boehm’s demonstration of a rational component to cultural change was new and important against the background of his particular discipline, although he would never claim that rational planning accounts for all cultural change. Contrast this configuration of ideas with Elster’s extraordinary statement that “intentional explanation is the feature that distinguishes the social sciences from the natural sciences” (1983, 69). Then contrast Elster’s reliance on conscious thought with the brain and behavioral sciences literature in which discussions of consciousness are reserved for the final chapters of books, with profuse apologies for their tentative nature (e.g., Rolls 1998)!

You know there is a problem when one man’s heresy is another man’s commonplace. It signals the need to step back and rebuild the social sciences from first principles, making the various subdisciplines consistent with each other and with evolutionary biology. One contribution that evolutionary biology can make to this enterprise is the classification outlined in [table 1.1](), which makes a fundamental distinction between functional vs. nonfunctional explanation and a secondary distinction between individual vs. group-level functional explanation. When functional explanations are warranted, the distinction between ultimate and proximate causation becomes critical. These are among the most basic distinctions that can be made from an evolutionary perspective, and they need to be preserved within the social sciences. As we have seen, rational choice theory slides so easily among these categories that they are scarcely recognized as categories. All subdisciplines of the social sciences need to appreciate that functional explanations must be handled with care, and that group-level functional explanations require the greatest care of all. Human groups cannot lightly be described as adaptive units, but if they can be rigorously shown to function as adaptive units, that will be a major scientific accomplishment.

A second contribution that evolutionary biology can make to rebuilding the social sciences is to provide a more sophisticated theory of psychology. As we have seen, rational choice theory is often presented as a psychological theory that attempts to explain the length and breadth of human nature with a few axioms about how people think. Alas, physics might be reducible to a few fundamental laws but not psychology. The human mind is a melange of adaptations and spandrels that have accumulated over millions of years, during which both culture and life in groups have been integral parts of the evolutionary process. Cost-benefit reasoning is an important part of human (and animal) psychology but not the only part. Tooby and Cosmides (1992) criticized learning theory in psychology for achieving the illusion of physics-like generality only by losing the ability to predict the specific content of what animals learn. The same criticism applies with equal force to rational choice theorists, who generally do not even attempt to predict the specific content of the utility that is supposedly maximized. This weakness, and evolutionary biology’s strength in comparison, will become evident in subsequent chapters.

There was a time when individualism reigned supreme both in evolutionary biology and in the human social sciences, creating an image of the individual as the only adaptive unit (or rational actor) in nature and of the group as merely a byproduct of what individuals do to each other. Those days are over. I stated at the beginning of [chapter 1]() that science is not a frictionless pendulum destined to swing forever between extreme positions. Evolutionary biology is settling into a middle position that acknowledges the potential for adaptation and natural selection at all levels of the biological hierarchy, especially in the case of human evolution. Group-level adaptation is here to stay in evolutionary biology, and the human social sciences must follow suit to remain true to first principles. Now that the organismic concept of groups has emerged from its intellectual wilderness, let us see how well it describes the nature of religion
